---
title: Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass (Russell Freedman)
author: E
date: '2018-07-02'
summaryOn: true
summary: 'Hola, this is el summary'
categories: []
tags:
  - books
  - review
showDate: no
draft: yes
---


*It wasn't easy to see the president. Not everyone got in. Douglass handed his calling card to a clerk and looked around for an empty chair. None was available, so he found a place to sit on the stairway leading to Lincoln's office. The stairs were filled with other men hoping for a moment with the nation's chief executive. Douglass had no appointment. He had no idea how long he might have to wait, or even if he would be granted an interview. By meeting with the president, he hoped “to secure just and fair treatment” for the thousands of black troops who had enlisted in the Union army and were now fighting for the North in America's Civil War. When the war began, federal law prohibited blacks from serving in the army. But as the fighting continued, with mounting casualties and no decisive victories, the North finally allowed African Americans to enlist. Black soldiers fought with distinction, but they were paid only half as much as white soldiers and were not being promoted for outstanding service. Worse, black prisoners of war were being executed or enslaved by their Southern captors. Douglass had come to Washington to “lay the complaints of my people before President Lincoln.” At forty-five, formally dressed for his visit, he was a commanding figure, taller than most men, with a powerful athlete's build, graying hair, penetrating brown eyes, and a carefully trimmed beard. A former slave, he had escaped to freedom and become a famous author, newspaper editor, and abolitionist. He had spent his career as a free man demanding that slavery be abolished in America and equal rights extended to whites and blacks alike. Douglass and Lincoln had never met, but they had some things in common. They had both risen from poverty and obscurity to international prominence. Both were self-educated. Lincoln, born dirt poor, had less than a year of formal schooling. Douglass, born a slave, wasn't permitted to go to school. He taught himself to read and write in secret, hiding the few books he was able to get his hands on. And in fact the two men had read and studied some of the same books.*  

- Page 5 (location ~ 71-86)    

*Born into slavery on a Maryland plantation, Frederick Douglass never knew exactly when his birthday was. “I have no accurate knowledge of my age,” he wrote, “never having seen any authentic record containing it. By far the larger part of the slaves know as little of their ages as horses know of theirs, and it is the wish of most masters ... to keep their slaves thus ignorant.” The question of his correct birth date and age plagued Douglass throughout his life. “The white children could tell their ages,” he recalled. “I could not tell why I ought to be deprived of the same privilege. I was not allowed to make any inquiries of my master concerning it. He deemed all such inquiries on the part of a slave improper and impertinent, and evidence of a restless spirit.” According to a slave inventory by Frederick's owner—evidence that was unavailable to him—he was born in February 1818. His mother was a young slave named Harriet Bailey. “My father was a white man,” he wrote.*  

- Page 7 (location ~ 96-103)    

*Whippings of slaves became seared into the boy’s memory. He remembered hiding terrified in a closet while his first owner, Aaron Anthony, was whipping Frederick’s aunt Hester. “The louder she screamed, the harder he whipped, and where the blood ran fastest, there he whipped the longest. I was quite a child, but I well remember it. I never shall forget it whilst I remember anything.... I dared not venture out [of the closet] till long after the bloody transaction was over. I expected it would be my turn next.” When Aaron Anthony died, his son-in-law, Thomas Auld, became the boy’s new owner. Frederick must have been a very bright and appealing youngster. Before he was old enough to work in the fields, he was picked from among the other slave children and sent to Baltimore to live with the family of Hugh Auld, Thomas’s brother. He would work as a houseboy for Auld’s wife, Sophia, and help look after the couple’s little son, Tommy. Sophia Auld was a kindly person who had never before had a slave under her control. She decided to teach Frederick to read, but when her husband found out, he ordered her to stop the lessons at once. As Frederick stood by silently, Hugh Auld warned his wife that it was unlawful, as well as unsafe, to teach a slave to read. If the boy learned to read, “there would be no keeping him,” said Hugh. “It would forever unfit him to be a slave. He would at once become unmanageable and of no value to his master. As to himself, it would do him no good, but a great deal of harm. It would make him discontented and unhappy.” Hugh’s words came as a revelation to Frederick. “I now understood what had been to me a most perplexing difficulty—to wit, the white man’s power to enslave the black man.... From that moment, I understood the pathway from slavery to freedom.... Though conscious of the difficulty of learning without a teacher, I*  

- Page 8 (location ~ 110-124)    

*Whippings of slaves became seared into the boy’s memory. He remembered hiding terrified in a closet while his first owner, Aaron Anthony, was whipping Frederick’s aunt Hester. “The louder she screamed, the harder he whipped, and where the blood ran fastest, there he whipped the longest. I was quite a child, but I well remember it. I never shall forget it whilst I remember anything.... I dared not venture out [of the closet] till long after the bloody transaction was over. I expected it would be my turn next.” When Aaron Anthony died, his son-in-law, Thomas Auld, became the boy’s new owner. Frederick must have been a very bright and appealing youngster. Before he was old enough to work in the fields, he was picked from among the other slave children and sent to Baltimore to live with the family of Hugh Auld, Thomas’s brother. He would work as a houseboy for Auld’s wife, Sophia, and help look after the couple’s little son, Tommy. Sophia Auld was a kindly person who had never before had a slave under her control. She decided to teach Frederick to read, but when her husband found out, he ordered her to stop the lessons at once. As Frederick stood by silently, Hugh Auld warned his wife that it was unlawful, as well as unsafe, to teach a slave to read. If the boy learned to read, “there would be no keeping him,” said Hugh. “It would forever unfit him to be a slave. He would at once become unmanageable and of no value to his master. As to himself, it would do him no good, but a great deal of harm. It would make him discontented and unhappy.” Hugh’s words came as a revelation to Frederick. “I now understood what had been to me a most perplexing difficulty—to wit, the white man’s power to enslave the black man.... From that moment, I understood the pathway from slavery to freedom.... Though conscious of the difficulty of learning without a teacher, I set out with high hope, and a fixed purpose, at whatever cost of trouble, to learn how to read.”*  

- Page 8 (location ~ 110-125)    

*One of the neighborhood boys had a book called The Columbian Orator, a collection of speeches and dialogues about freedom, democracy, and courage compiled by Caleb Bingham, a Boston bookseller. This book, widely popular at the time, made a deep and lasting impression on young Frederick Bailey—“that gem of a book,” he called it, “with its eloquent orations and spicy dialogues, denouncing oppression and slavery.” With fifty cents he had somehow managed to save, he bought a secondhand copy of the book. When he was out on an errand, he would find a quiet spot where he could be alone. Then he would pull The Columbian Orator out of his pocket and read aloud, listening to the sound of his voice as he recited some of the great speeches of the past.*  

- Page 9 (location ~ 135-140)    

*One of the neighborhood boys had a book called The Columbian Orator, a collection of speeches and dialogues about freedom, democracy, and courage compiled by Caleb Bingham, a Boston bookseller. This book, widely popular at the time, made a deep and lasting impression on young Frederick Bailey—“that gem of a book,” he called it, “with its eloquent orations and spicy dialogues, denouncing oppression and slavery.” With fifty cents he had somehow managed to save, he bought a secondhand copy of the book. When he was out on an errand, he would find a quiet spot where he could be alone. Then he would pull The Columbian Orator out of his pocket and read aloud, listening to the sound of his voice as he recited some of the great speeches of the past. He read one selection, “Dialogue Between a Master and Slave,” so many times, he could still quote from it decades later. The slave has been captured after running away for the third time. His master says that he has been kind and the slave should be grateful. The slave replies that kindness has nothing to do with it; he wants liberty. Each argument that the master puts forward in defense of slavery is dismissed by the slave with such power and conviction that in the end, the slave wins his freedom.  *  

- Page 9 (location ~ 135-144)  
