---
title: Methods of Persuasion-  How to Use Psychology to Influence Human Behavior (Nick Kolenda)
author: E
date: '2017-03-29'
summaryOn: true
summary: 'Hola, this is el summary'
categories: []
tags:
  - books
  - review
showDate: no
draft: yes
---


*Do you still remember the rating that you gave Mark? The people in the study who filled out the best friend questionnaire gave an average rating of 5.56 for Mark’s level of motivation. Was your rating higher? According to the results, people who filled out the questionnaire about their mother viewed Mark to be significantly more motivated (Fitzsimons & Bargh, 2003). Why did people perceive Mark differently depending on the questionnaire? Since nothing in the blurb changed, logic suggests that both groups should have given Mark the same rating. What was so powerful about the mother questionnaire that altered people’s perception of him? In general, people associate motivation and striving toward success more with their mothers than with their best friends.*  

- Page 10 (location ~ 151-157)    

*Schemas. For any general concept, you usually associate many other ideas with that concept. For example, your concept of mother would include the idea of motivation, along with many other ideas that you associate with your mother. Further, if that set of associations—known as a schema—becomes activated, it can alter your perception and behavior because it would make the other associated concepts more prevalent in your mind (e.g., activating a schema of mother made the idea of motivation more prevalent, which influenced people’s perception of Mark). Though schemas can often result in positive perceptions, such as perceived motivation, schemas can also result in negative perceptions, such as stereotypes. For example, under your schema of “Asian” is probably the idea of superior math skills. Even if you don’t believe that Asians are genuinely superior at math, the mere presence of that association is enough to influence your perception and behavior.*  

- Page 11 (location ~ 164-172)    

*Researchers from Harvard conducted a clever study to test that claim (Shih, Pittinsky, & Ambady, 1999). Their study was particularly clever because they used a group of people who belonged to conflicting stereotypes: Asian-American women. On one hand, there’s a common stereotype that Asians are superior at math, but on the other hand, there’s a common stereotype that females are inferior at math. The researchers wanted to examine how activating those conflicting schemas could influence their performance on a math test. Before giving the test, the researchers asked two groups of Asian-American women some questions. Some women were asked questions that related to their sex (e.g., if the floors in their dorms were either co-ed or single sex). Other women, however, were asked questions that related to their race and heritage (e.g., the languages that they knew or spoke at home). Thus, one group had their schema of “female” activated, whereas the other group had their schema of “Asian” activated. You can probably guess what happened when the researchers later presented those groups with a supposedly unrelated math test. Women who were primed with their schema for Asian performed significantly better than a control group (women who were asked neutral questions), and women who were primed with their schema for female performed significantly worse than the control group. Therefore, any idea that we associate with a particular schema—even if we don’t believe in that association—can still influence our perception and behavior if that schema becomes activated.*  

- Page 12 (location ~ 172-184)    

*Priming. Priming is the means by which you activate a schema or mindset. In the previous study about stereotypes, the “prime” was the questionnaire. When people filled out the questionnaire, their schema for either Asian or female became activated. Does that mean you need to ask people to complete a questionnaire in order to prime a schema? Nope. Luckily, there are many easier ways to prime particular schemas (though I suppose you could ask your target to fill out a questionnaire if you really wanted to). If not by questionnaire, how else can you prime a schema? Research shows that you can prime a schema by merely exposing people to certain words or ideas related to a particular schema. To illustrate, the next study offers a prime example (ha, get the pun?). Using the disguise of a word-puzzle task, Bargh, Chen, and Burrows (1996) exposed people to words relating to the elderly (e.g., bingo, wise, retired, Florida). When the experiment was supposedly over, what do you think happened when people walked out of the room? Astonishingly, compared to a control group, people walked out of the room significantly slower when they were exposed to the elderly related words. Those words primed a schema for the elderly, which then activated behavior that people associate with the elderly: walking slow.*  

- Page 13 (location ~ 185-197)    

*Spreading Activation. Our brains have a semantic network, a giant interconnected web of knowledge containing everything that we’ve learned over time. Each concept in that network, referred to as a “node,” is connected to other concepts that are related in some aspect (the more related they are, the stronger the connection that exists between them). Due to those connections, whenever a node in our semantic network becomes activated (via some type of prime), all other nodes that are connected become activated as well, a principle known as spreading activation (Collins & Loftus, 1975).*  

- Page 14 (location ~ 209-213)    

*Standard Schema. If you want to trigger a more open-minded perception in your target, why not simply prime a schema of open-mindedness? In fact, exposure to words merely relating to open-mindedness (e.g., flexible, elastic, rubber, change) have been found to trigger more open-minded perceptions (Hassin, 2008). Bingo! And there’s even more good news. Although it wouldn’t hurt to mention your “flexible” schedule, there’s an even simpler way to activate an open-minded schema. The studies in this chapter have shown that you can easily activate schemas by simply getting someone to think about a concept. To activate an open-minded perception, you simply need to expose your target to an example of open-mindedness. One simple technique to activate an open-minded perception is to initiate a conversation that revolves around the idea of open-mindedness. Perhaps a few minutes before you present your message or make your request, you casually describe a story of someone who recently tried a new experience and enjoyed it. Even something as simple as the following can work: Remember how you told me that I should start listening to the band, Mumford & Sons? I didn’t like them at first, but I listened to them again, and I really like them now. Making a simple and innocent statement about someone acting open-mindedly can help activate your target’s schema of open-mindedness, and that activation will trigger a more open-minded perception. Much like asking people to think about their mother can cause them to perceive someone as more motivated, getting someone to think about open-mindedness will create a lens through which they will perceive things from a more open-minded perspective. And if the previous conversation starter doesn’t suit your personality or the situation, no worries! There are plenty of other conversation starters that you can use: What are your thoughts on skydiving? My friend Sandra was petrified about going, but she recently went, and she absolutely loved it. Do you like eggplant? My friend Bill used to hate eggplant with a passion, but he recently tried it and, it’s funny, he actually loves it now. I’ve never been a huge fan of eggplant, but I guess I’ll have to try it again sometime. My company just hired a new employee. Although I didn’t like him at first, I kept an open mind, and he’s finally starting to grow on me.*  

- Page 17 (location ~ 250-272)    

*Prime Their Behavior. What if, instead of perception, you wanted to trigger compliance toward a request? In these situations that rely more on behavior, priming the concept of open-mindedness might not do the trick. So are you out of luck? Nope. You simply need to prime a different mindset. Remember how elderly-related words activated people’s schema for the elderly and caused them to walk more slowly? Mounting research has shown that a variety of different behaviors can be triggered through priming. To see the endless potential of priming, take a look at Table 1.1 to see some interesting findings that other research as found.*  

- Page 19 (location ~ 288-293)    

*Standard Schemas. What’s a good schema that can help you trigger compliance? You could use the same conversation-starter technique that was described in the previous section, except you could initiate a conversation revolving around compliance, rather than open-mindedness. A conversation about someone complying with a request might activate your target’s schema for compliance, which could then trigger a certain behavior that your target associates with compliance—namely, compliance. Another standard schema that has garnered support from research is helpfulness. When people were exposed to words relating to helpfulness, they were more likely to help an experimenter who accidentally dropped items after the experiment had supposedly ended (Macrae & Johnston, 1998). And as you can see from the list of priming studies, similar effects have been found for activating schemas of politeness (Bargh, Chen, & Burrows, 1996) and friendship (Fitzsimons & Bargh, 2003). Finally, one last schema that you could activate in nearly any situation relates to a common social norm. Here’s a hint: it involves an occasion that occurs once a year. Give up? For centuries, the idea of gift giving has become heavily associated with our schema for birthdays. As a result, if you prime someone’s schema for birthday, you’re likely to trigger behavior associated with gift giving. If I wanted to make a viral video, I could put the odds in my favor by using that “birthday” technique to persuade a large group of my Facebook friends to initially share the video. How? Before posting the video to my Facebook and asking my friends to share it, I could change my profile picture to a picture of me cutting a cake on my birthday (no matter how far back in time the picture was taken). Exposing people to that picture would then prime their schema for birthdays, and subsequently, the idea of gift giving. Because the idea of gift giving would become activated upon that exposure, my Facebook friends would feel greater pressure to comply with a favor, such as to share my video. Could that simple technique really cause a video to go viral? I used that exact technique with my YouTube video, “Chat Roulette Mind Reading—Part 1,” and an astounding number of my Facebook friends shared the video (which then went viral and reached almost a million views within the first week). There were obviously many other factors involved as well, but my new profile picture definitely didn’t hurt. You should also realize that these types of priming effects often occur outside of our conscious awareness. If people see the picture of me cutting my birthday cake, they don’t need to think, “Oh, is it Nick’s birthday? I should probably do something nice for him by sharing his video.” In fact, they don’t even need to consciously notice my new profile picture. Much like a subliminal exposure to Apple’s logo can trigger creative behavior, a nonconscious exposure to my birthday-related picture can still trigger gift giving behavior. People will feel greater pressure to share my video, yet they won’t know why. Oh, the beauty of priming.*  

- Page 20 (location ~ 297-321)    

*Even though I now perform as a “mind reader,” nothing that I perform is based on any sort of supernatural phenomenon. In fact, there are only three main ways that anyone can “read minds.” You can either: Use magic and deception (e.g., sleight of hand) to make it seem like you knew what someone was thinking. Rely on body language, nonverbal behavior, and other deductive cues to guess what someone is thinking. Prime someone to think of a specific thought without their awareness and then proceed to “read their mind.” Which method do I use? I rely mostly on the third method, but I use the first and second methods to further enhance the impossibility of my demonstrations. When I use the third method to nonconsciously influence people to think of something—whether it’s the Easter Bunny, the color orange, or a dessert cake—I use subtle cues in my script to prime a particular thought. I described the demonstration with the number seven at the beginning of the chapter, but I’ll give you another example. And again, go with the first answer that pops into your head. Think of a vegetable that you might find in a garden.*  

- Page 23 (location ~ 338-349)    

*Perhaps the most striking finding from research is that even deliberate warnings about anchoring go unheeded. In one study, Wilson and colleagues (1996) asked people to estimate the number of physicians they believed would appear in a phone book, and they asked people to give their estimate after writing down a four-digit ID number. The researchers wanted to examine whether a deliberate warning about anchoring would affect their estimation, and so they warned people how their arbitrary ID number could influence their estimations: A number in people’s heads can influence their answers to subsequent questions . . . When you answer the questions on the following pages, please be careful not to have this contamination effect happen to you. We would like the most accurate estimates that you can come up with. (Wilson et al., 1996, p. 397) Surprisingly, despite that deliberate warning, people were still influenced by their arbitrary ID number when they estimated the number of physicians in the phone book. Even when people are fully aware of the powerful impact of anchoring, they still succumb to its influence. It doesn’t get more powerful than that!*  

- Page 26 (location ~ 388-398)    

*Produce Accurate Judgments. Perhaps the main reason why we use anchoring—either consciously or nonconsciously—is that we truly believe it leads to more accurate judgments. This section will discuss two pieces of evidence to support that notion: (1) people who are highly motivated to produce an accurate judgment still use anchoring, and (2) when no anchors are given, people often generate their own anchors to help make their judgment. Occurs When Motivation Is High. The researchers who conducted the phone book experiment conducted another experiment where they gave people an incentive to produce accurate estimates. Participants in the experiment were told that the person with the closest estimate would receive a $50 prize, but the results showed that the incentive and additional motivation made no difference—the irrelevant ID number still influenced their estimates (Wilson et al., 1996). Not only does anchoring influence trivial judgments, such as the number of physicians in a phonebook, but it can also influence very important decisions. Extensive research has applied the anchoring effect to criminal trials, and unfortunately, evidence shows that judges rely on anchors to determine the lengths of their sentencing. For instance, when legal professionals were asked to read a hypothetical shoplifting case and then decide a proper sentencing length, they were influenced by the prosecutor’s recommended length, even when they were informed that the length was chosen at random: For experimental purposes, the following prosecutor’s sentencing demand was randomly determined, therefore, it does not reflect any judicial expertise: The prosecutor demands a sentence [of] 3 months on probation. (Englich, Mussweiler, & Strack, 2006, p. 192)*  

- Page 27 (location ~ 402-416)    

*When exposed to a 1 month demand from the defense and that 3 month demand from the prosecution, the legal experts gave an average sentence of 4 months. When the 3 months from the previous excerpt was replaced by 9 months, however, legal experts gave an average sentence of 6 months. The sentencing length increased by 2 months even though the description clearly mentioned that the suggested length was chosen at random. A 2-month difference might not seem that substantial, but research has found differences in sentencing lengths that span several years (Pepitone & DiNubile, 1976), even when there is greater emphasis on the arbitrariness of the anchor, such as a recommended length that results from rolling a pair of dice (Englich, Mussweiler, & Strack, 2006). Therefore, even people with high expertise—such as legal professionals—use anchors to produce their judgments. It’s truly mind-boggling how one quick exposure to an irrelevant number could change someone’s life forever.*  

- Page 28 (location ~ 416-423)    

*Suppose that you’re applying for a job position and you’re asked to input your desired salary (what an aggravating question, huh?). To produce your estimate, you would likely use a three-step anchoring process: Determine the average salary for that type of position (perhaps through personal experience or a quick Google search). Judge the reputation of the hiring company (whether the company seems above or below average). Mentally start from the average salary and adjust your desired salary according to the reputation of the hiring company. If the company is very prestigious and reputable, you would likely adjust your desired salary upward from the average (and vice versa). In that scenario, the average salary is considered a “self-generated anchor” because you created that anchor to produce your desired salary.*  

- Page 28 (location ~ 427-435)    

*Let’s assume that you generated a range of 50–70 percent (which could have been produced either consciously or nonconsciously). If the initial anchor point was 90 percent, you would have determined your exact probability by adjusting downward from 90 percent until you reached the first plausible estimate in your range—in this case, it would have been 70 percent (the very top of your range of probabilities). On the flip side, if the initial anchor point was 10 percent, you would have determined your estimate by adjusting upward from 10 percent until you reached the first probability within your range—in this case, it would have been 50 percent (the very bottom of your range of probabilities). The takeaway: anchoring can produce inaccurate judgments because we often adjust from an anchor point until we reach the outermost estimate within a range of plausible judgments (Epley & Gilovich, 2006). Applying that principle to courtrooms, suppose that the average sentencing length for a particular crime ranges from 2 to 4 years. If the prosecutor demands a sentence of 5 years, then the judge is likely to start from 5 years and adjust his sentence downward until he reaches the outermost sentence of 4 years. If the defense demands a sentence of 1 year, then the judge is likely to start from 1 year and adjust his sentence upward until he reaches the outermost sentence of 2 years. In either case, the difference is 2 years—a full 2 years of someone’s life would be completely dependent on an arbitrary number presented to the judge.*  

- Page 30 (location ~ 449-460)    

*Contrast effects influence our perception not only with arbitrary circles but with many different types of stimuli each day, including our perception of other people’s attractiveness. For example, researchers showed men a picture of a female after the men had watched Charlie’s Angels—a television show from the 1970s with three very attractive females as the main characters. Compared to a control group, men who had been watching Charlie’s Angels rated the female in the picture to be less attractive because the television show created a contrast effect (Kenrick & Gutierres, 1989). Like assimilation, contrast effects alter our perception on a daily basis without our awareness. For example, these effects can influence whether you choose to eat an unhealthy meal or an organic fruit salad. To demonstrate, estimate the calorie content in a typical cheeseburger. Keep that exact estimate in the back of your mind because we’ll return to it in a second.*  

- Page 32 (location ~ 486-493)    

*Do you recall your estimate of the calorie content in a typical cheeseburger? If you were to ask other people that same question, their estimate would likely be lower than yours. Why? Immediately before I asked you to estimate, I subtly mentioned an organic fruit salad. Although you might not have realized it, that cue became an extreme anchor point that influenced you to perceive a cheeseburger as having more calories. A recent study confirmed that same outcome (Chernev, 2011). People who were primed to think of “an organic fruit salad” (an anchor point that’s positioned on the extreme low end of the calorie spectrum) adjusted their calorie estimate of a subsequent cheeseburger away from the low end because that extreme anchor point made the calorie difference seem more pronounced. In a sense, the very healthy fruit salad became one of the smaller surrounding circles in the optical illusion, which caused you to perceive a large number of calories in a cheeseburger. Conversely, people who were primed to think of a “decadent cheesecake” (an anchor point that’s positioned on the extreme high end of the calorie spectrum) adjusted their calorie estimate of a cheeseburger away from the high end. The cheeseburger became the seemingly smaller Circle B because the very unhealthy cheesecake made the number of calories in a cheeseburger seem fewer.*  

- Page 33 (location ~ 498-510)    

*Before continuing, you should realize that contrast effects occur only with semantic categories (e.g., types of food, types of crime). The good news is that nearly all numeric anchors cause assimilation. Much like how people give higher estimates of Gandhi’s age when they’re asked if he was younger or older than 140 (Strack & Mussweiler, 1997), any number that you present to your target—whether that number is relevant, arbitrary, or absurdly extreme—will cause people to adjust their judgment toward that number.*  

- Page 34 (location ~ 515-520)    

*Present a Decoy. As Dan Ariely (2009) describes in Predictably Irrational, the options that you present to your target can become anchor points that people use to compare the other options. Imagine that you’re deciding between two subscriptions to a magazine: Product A: Online subscription for $59. Product B: Online and print subscription for $125. When presented with those options, 68 percent of students chose the online subscription and 32 percent chose the online and print subscription, a distribution that resulted in $8,012 of revenue. But something fascinating happened when a new subscription option was added. Take a look at the product marked as “B–” (to imply that the product is similar to Product B, yet worse in one aspect): Product A: Online subscription for $59. Product B–: Print subscription for $125. Product B: Online and print subscription for $125. If you present those options to people, you’d be hard-pressed to find even one person who would choose Product B–. Why would you choose a print only subscription when you could choose the online and print for the same price? And your intuitive judgment would be correct; when that new option was given to a sample of students, not one person chose it. Nevertheless, its mere presence drastically changed the outcome and increased revenue from $8,012 to $11,444. Why? The percentage of people choosing the online only subscription dropped from 68 percent to 16 percent, whereas the percentage of people choosing the online and print subscription (a more expensive option) increased from 32 percent to 84 percent. Due to contrast effects, Product B became a seemingly better option because people could compare it to Product B–, a clearly worse option. Because there was no equivalent product to which Product A could be compared, people were more likely to choose Product B because they perceived it to be the best option. When people are undecided between two different options, you can influence them to choose a particular option by adding a new option that is similar to one, but either better or worse in some aspect. When you add that similar option into the mix, you give people an anchor that they can use to judge the existing similar option. If the new option is better, then the new option is perceived as the clear winner, but if the new option is worse, then the already existing similar option becomes the clear winner.*  

- Page 35 (location ~ 526-552)    

*Even if you’re not selling products, you could apply the decoy effect toward minuscule life moments, such as influencing your friends to eat at a particular restaurant. Suppose that you’re arguing with your friends about where to eat. Some are arguing for a particular Mexican restaurant, whereas you and a few others are pulling for a particular Chinese restaurant. If you know that your friends dislike another particular Chinese restaurant, you could put the odds in your favor by throwing that option into the mix Because that option is similar to yours but worse in some respect, you trigger a contrast effect that will make your existing Chinese restaurant seem even better.*  

- Page 37 (location ~ 556-560)    

*In the original study that examined this technique, Robert Cialdini and his colleagues (1975) asked random college students to volunteer at a juvenile delinquency center for two hours each week over the next two years. You can probably guess what happened. Everyone immediately jumped at the incredible opportunity, right? Not quite. As expected, nearly everyone politely turned down that large request. But something interesting happened when the researchers followed that large request with a smaller request: to take the juvenile delinquents on a two-hour trip to the zoo. Without that initial large request, only 17 percent of people agreed to the zoo trip, but when that initial large request was presented (and rejected), compliance for the zoo trip request nearly tripled to 50 percent. The large request created an anchor from which people could judge the size of the zoo trip. With such a large anchor established, the zoo trip was perceived to be much smaller, thereby leading to a higher rate of compliance.*  

- Page 37 (location ~ 566-574)    

*Not only can expectations mold our perception, but they can also influence our behavior. In another experiment, some people purchased an energy drink at a full price of $1.89, whereas other people purchased the same energy drink at a discount price of $.89. The researchers wanted to examine whether people’s knowledge of the drink’s price would influence their performance on a mental task, and the results were pretty enlightening. People who purchased the drink at full price performed significantly better than people who purchased the drink at a discount, even though the drink was exactly the same in each condition (Shiv, Carmon, & Ariely, 2005). People who purchased the drink at full price developed higher expectations for the drink’s effectiveness, thereby causing them to perform better on the mental task, whereas people who purchased the drink at a discount developed lower expectations, causing them to perform worse on the mental task. Even something as innocent as the price of an energy drink can convey certain expectations, which can then influence our perception and behavior.*  

- Page 44 (location ~ 664-672)    

*We feel a strong desire to confirm our expectations because it feels upsetting when information disconfirms our expectations. Like most people, you probably cringe whenever you hear a recording of your own voice. The voice projecting from that device sounds so foreign that it can’t possibly be your voice. But wait. Is your distaste resulting from a poor recording device or is your distaste resulting from your expectations? When we speak, our brain hears a voice that’s different from the voice that other people hear. When we project our voice, the muscles that produce our speech cause a vibration that runs from our neck to our brain’s auditory mechanisms, and those vibrations internally distort our voice. Because those vibrations occur internally, other people (including voice recorders) hear your voice without those distortions—i.e., your true external voice. Over time, you become so familiar with your internally distorted voice that when you hear your true voice from a recorder, your voice sounds very different, and those incongruent expectations are the culprit behind your distaste toward the sound of your voice. The best way to develop an appreciation for your voice is to become accustomed to the way it truly sounds. People with a background in voice work (e.g., radio hosts) eventually grow to enjoy the sound of their voice because the frequent exposure helps them develop the appropriate expectations.*  

- Page 46 (location ~ 694-704)    

*Your expectations likely molded your perception of that blurb and caused you to skim over that discrepancy so that you could confirm your expectations. But now that your conscious mind is aware of that extra word, that discrepancy becomes so obvious that it can be amazing how you could have missed such a glaring error in the first place.*  

- Page 47 (location ~ 713-715)    

*Self-Fulfilling Prophecies. In all of the previous explanations—anchoring, confirmation bias, and selective avoidance—the objective reality of an event never changed. The only thing that changed was our interpretation. However, our expectations can also change the objective reality. Suppose that your friend Debbie is introducing you to her friend Emily. Before you meet Emily, Debbie describes her as cold, standoffish, and unfriendly, which causes you to develop the expectation that you won’t get along with her. And upon meeting Emily, you find that your expectation is met: her personality seems very distant and unapproachable, and you can’t seem to connect with her. When the conversation ends, you leave with no future intention of interacting with Emily again because of her unfriendly demeanor.*  

- Page 47 (location ~ 715-721)    

*First Impressions. Quick. Take five seconds to estimate the value of the following equation: 1 x 2 x 3 x 4 x 5 x 6 x 7 x 8 Now that you have your answer, do you think that your answer would have been different if instead I asked you to calculate the following equation: 8 x 7 x 6 x 5 x 4 x 3 x 2 x 1 Both equations are essentially the same; the only difference is the order of the numbers. Because both equations produce the same results, it’s safe to assume that your guess would have been the same, right? Au contraire. Research shows that your guess would have been very different if I asked you to estimate the second equation instead of the first. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman (1973) conducted that study and found that people who were shown the first equation estimated a median of 512, and people who were shown the second equation estimated a median of 2,250. Logic and rationale suggest that people’s answers should have been the same, so what sparked that difference? The answer can be found in the primacy effect, which describes how information presented earlier in a sequence can produce a greater impact than information presented later in a sequence (Murdock, 1962). You can think of the primacy effect as a type of anchor. Those initial numbers set a specific anchor (either high or low depending on the equation), which influenced people’s estimates.*  

- Page 50 (location ~ 762-775)    

*If I’m hypnotizing someone that I just met, after 5 to 10 minutes of speaking with him, I smile and say, “It’s funny. You seem like a very hypnotizable person. You seem like someone who could easily go into a deep state of hypnosis. That’s a great quality to have.” Because many people have doubts about their ability to be hypnotized (often because of how it’s portrayed on stage), that statement removes any mental defenses that the person may possess, and it reinforces their expectations that they will be hypnotized. In turn, that makes it easier for me to guide them into a deep state of hypnosis. Although I learned hypnosis mainly by studying the academic research on the subject, I recommend seeking proper training if you’re interested in learning it. Hypnotherapy training is offered throughout the country and probably near your location. Hypnosis is a fantastic skill to possess, but because it can be very powerful, you should seek proper training if you’re interested in learning it.*  

- Page 53 (location ~ 811-819)    

*You know that your budget-concerned husband would never go for the first option, so you plan to present that decoy to set an absurdly high anchor point. When you present the second vacation option (the trip to Disneyland), a contrast effect will make this vacation seem much smaller because of your husband’s newly anchored perception. He gets home from work one day, and you put that plan into action. But before you bring up the idea about taking a family vacation, you put the odds further in your favor by mentioning that Mackenzie has been starting to eat vegetables—a food that she’s always disliked. With this conversation involving Mackenzie’s open-mindedness, you hope to activate your husband’s schema for open-mindedness so that he will temporarily develop a more open-minded perception.*  

- Page 54 (location ~ 828-834)    

*The term “congruent” essentially means “consistent.” If your target is engaging in a certain behavior (e.g., highlighting), he will feel greater pressure to develop an attitude that is “congruent” with his behavior. For example, if he’s highlighting more than he would typically highlight, then he will infer that he must really like this book. That notion is the main principle of Step 2 in METHODS. Because people experience a natural urge to hold attitudes that are consistent with their behavior, you can elicit an attitude that would be favorable for your situation by altering someone’s body language or behavior to reflect that attitude. The next two chapters will explain why this principle is so powerful and how you can start applying it.*  

- Page 56 (location ~ 858-863)    

*Now that you have a better “grasp” of embodied cognition, the original three bulleted findings might make more sense: If a résumé feels heavier—even if it’s only due to a heavy clipboard—people falsely associate the heaviness with value. Not only is there a nonsensical belief that more information is packed into the résumé, but there’s also the common metaphor that important things tend to “carry more weight.” Why does writing down negative thoughts about yourself lower your self-esteem only when you write them with your dominant hand? When you write down negative thoughts with your nondominant hand, the effect disappears because you’re less confident in your writing ability. The lack of confidence that you feel from writing is misattributed to a lack of confidence in the accuracy of those negative thoughts. When we push our arm upward against a table, that movement resembles bending our arm inward, an action that we perform when we bring something toward us. Because we perform that action when we find something appealing, people who were asked to push their arm upward ate significantly more cookies compared to people who were asked to push their arm downward, an action that we perform when we push something away from us.*  

- Page 58 (location ~ 887-897)    

*WHY IS EMBODIED COGNITION SO POWERFUL? Still skeptical about embodied cognition? There are a few psychological principles that can explain why it occurs. Facial Feedback Hypothesis. Remember how I asked you to read the opening description while biting a pen with your teeth? A group of researchers asked people to view a series of cartoons while holding a pen in their mouth. They asked some people to bite the pen with their teeth, and they asked other people to simply hold the pen with their lips. The researchers found that people who were biting the pen with their teeth (a position that caused them to smile) found the cartoons more amusing compared to people who were holding the pen with their lips (a position that didn’t cause them to smile) (Strack, Martin, & Stepper, 1988). To explain that phenomenon—which has become known as the facial feedback hypothesis—Robert Zajonc proposed a vascular theory of emotion, a theory suggesting that our body language can trigger biological mechanisms that, in turn, influence our emotional state and interpretation of information. When he and his colleagues (1989) asked German students to repeat certain vowel sounds (i, e, o, a, u, ah, ü), they found that students exhibited lower forehead temperature when they repeated e and ah vowel sounds (sounds that caused them to exude smiling expressions). Those smiling expressions cooled the students’ arterial blood, which produced a more pleasant mood by lowering their brain temperature. Conversely, repeating u and ü sounds forced students to frown, which decreased blood flow and heightened brain temperature, thereby dampening their mood. The mere act of smiling can spark biological mechanisms, which can then trigger attitudes and emotions that we associate with smiling.*  

- Page 59 (location ~ 903-919)    

*Self-Perception Theory. Self-perception theory proposes that we sometimes infer our attitudes by examining our behavior (Bem, 1972). If we hold an ambiguous attitude toward something, we try to make sense of that attitude by examining our actions and body language. For example, when people viewed photographs of celebrities, they perceived them to be less famous when they were asked to view the pictures while furrowing their eyebrows, a facial expression associated with exerting mental effort (Strack & Neumann, 2000). When people furrowed their eyebrows, they inferred from their facial expression that they were exerting mental effort to think of that celebrity, an inference that led them to perceive the celebrities to be less famous.*  

- Page 61 (location ~ 922-928)    

*If there’s ever inconsistency between our attitudes and body language, we tend to trust the latter. Consider a clever experiment from the 1960s (Valins, 1967). A researcher told a group of males that he would be measuring their heartbeats in response toward sexual images and that they would be hearing their heartbeat while viewing the photos. However, the men were told that this audio was merely due to poor equipment and that they should ignore the sound of their heartbeat (you should keep in mind that this study was conducted in 1967, when technology was just slightly less developed . . .). During the experiment, the men were shown 10 pictures of females from Playboy, and they heard their “heartbeat” increase on 5 of those 10 pictures (when in actuality, the sound was fake and controlled by the researcher). The results were quite surprising: the men found the females more attractive when their heart rate had supposedly increased. This influence was so strong that the males still chose those same photographs when they were asked again 2 months later. Thus, even when biological responses are inaccurate (or even fake), we still tend to trust that feedback by developing attitudes that are congruent with those responses. As you’ll learn in the next chapter, self-perception theory plays an even more powerful role when it comes to behavior (i.e., not just body language).*  

- Page 61 (location ~ 928-939)    

*Wells and Petty (1980) gave students a pair of headphones and asked them to listen to a radio broadcast. They asked the students to test the quality of the headphones by either nodding their head up and down or by shaking their head from side to side while listening to the broadcast. The researchers found that, compared to students who shook their head from side to side, students who tested the sound quality by nodding their head developed a greater positive attitude toward the message in the broadcast. Due to the strong association between head nodding and agreement, getting people to nod their head before you make your request can trigger a more agreeable state of mind. How can you get your target to nod her head? Luckily, head nodding is a type of gesture that’s fairly easy to nonverbally extract. Whenever you’re speaking to someone, you can usually pause or raise your eyebrows to nonverbally communicate when you want that person to acknowledge one of your points, which can then trigger a head nod. During the moments leading up to your actual request, you should make several of those nonverbal cues for acknowledgement so that you can condition your target to nod her head. Not only would her attitude become more open-minded because of embodied cognition, but those frequent head nods will also trigger a form of inertia. If you condition your target to nod her head multiple times before you make your request, she’ll feel motivated to remain consistent with those responses by making an affirmative response to your request (the psychology behind that concept is explained in the next chapter).*  

- Page 62 (location ~ 949-961)    

*When people want to communicate that they’re open and they have nothing to hide, they often hold their palms outward with their arms spread to reveal their chest. Likewise, when people feel closed-minded, they often cross their arms or hold an object in front of them to block their chest. People often block their chest when they’re feeling defensive or closed-minded because it serves as a symbolic defense to prevent new information from penetrating their thoughts and attitudes. If you watch a video of Nixon’s speech when he defends himself against the Watergate scandal, after he says, “I’m not a crook. I’ve earned everything I’ve got,” he immediately steps back from the podium and crosses his arms in front of his chest, as if he wanted to make that statement and retreat without any further questions or inquiries. It reminds me of a child who insults one of his peers and then immediately plugs his ears to prevent his friend from making a “comeback.” Because we associate crossing our arms with greater defensiveness, this position can trigger an unyielding attitude (Bull, 1987). In fact, people in one study were able to solve significantly more anagrams when they were induced to cross their arms because that body language triggered a more persistent attitude (Friedman & Elliot, 2008). Although persistency is typically considered a positive trait, a persistent attitude will dramatically reduce your chances of gaining compliance because you’ll be less likely to change someone’s attitude. Instead of combating that persistency, it would be much more favorable for you to wait until your target’s body language is more conducive for persuasion. Because an exposed chest (e.g., no crossed arms, no objects being held) triggers a more agreeable attitude, that type of body language can enhance your persuasion.*  

- Page 63 (location ~ 963-978)    

*Perhaps the strongest attitude associated with posture is pride. Whenever we feel accomplished or proud, we tend to exude an upright posture, but whenever we feel nervous or insecure, we tend to exude a slumped posture. Research shows that extracting these positions can, in fact, trigger those corresponding attitudes. In one study, Stepper and Strack (1993) measured people’s level of satisfaction with their performance on an achievement test, but due to the seating arrangements, people were seated in either an upright or slumped position. The researchers found that, upon discovering their scores, people who were seated upright were significantly more satisfied with their score compared to people who were seated in a slumped position. In addition to being associated with pride, however, posture is also closely associated with power. If you’re familiar with the card game blackjack, then you probably know that people who have 16 are usually unsure if they should play it safe by staying at 16 or by taking a risk and asking for another card in hopes that the new card doesn’t put them over 21. The strong association between posture and power can explain why people who are induced to display an expansive body posture are significantly more likely to take another card in that situation (Huang et al., 2011). The expansive posture triggers a congruent attitude associated with power, which nonconsciously influences people to take that risk.*  

- Page 65 (location ~ 982-993)    

*If you’re ever feeling nervous or insecure in a particular situation, you can help alleviate those feelings by changing your posture. If you sit upright and exude an expansive posture, you can trigger a congruent attitude of confidence and overcome your nervousness. To summarize the chapter, we often infer our attitudes from our body language. If you want to instill a certain attitude in your target, you simply need to get your target to exude body language associated with the attitude that you’re trying to instill. By getting your target to display that body language, you can trigger an attitude that’s “congruent” with that body language. Although the information in this chapter is powerful, let’s be honest, it’s not that practical. But I still wanted to include this chapter so that you had a good grasp of self-perception theory because the next chapter will explain the more powerful and practical applications of that concept. Specifically, it’ll explain why behavior—not just body language—can trigger congruent attitudes. You’ll also learn why we feel tremendous pressure to maintain attitudes that are consistent with our behavior and how you can take advantage of that innate desire for consistency.*  

- Page 65 (location ~ 993-1003)    

*Unbeknownst to members of the cult who were waiting for the flying saucer to arrive, Leon Festinger, a prominent researcher in social psychology, infiltrated the group with his colleagues. They pretended to be followers of the cult so that they could observe their behavior (pretty dedicated researchers, huh?). Upon witnessing cult members develop stronger beliefs about the end of the world after the flood failed to arrive, Festinger developed an important conclusion: people have a powerful psychological need to maintain consistent attitudes and behavior. That conclusion can help explain why body language can trigger congruent attitudes. If we display certain body language (e.g., head nodding), and if that body language is inconsistent with our inner attitude (e.g., we’re in disagreement), we feel a state of discomfort known as cognitive dissonance, and we become motivated to resolve that discomfort. How do we resolve it? We often resolve that dissonance by changing our attitude so that it matches our behavior (e.g., we change our attitude from disagreement to agreement to match our body language of nodding our head).*  

- Page 68 (location ~ 1032-1040)    

*You just started a new diet, yet you’re eating a piece of cake. You might justify your inconsistent behavior by reminding yourself that it’s your friend’s birthday and that it would be “rude” if you didn’t eat the cake. You believe that people shouldn’t steal, yet you illegally download music. You might justify your inconsistent behavior by claiming that “everyone else is doing it.” You consider yourself a studious college student, yet you’re choosing to hang out with friends rather than study for an exam. You might justify your inconsistent behavior by reassuring yourself that it’s your senior year so you need to enjoy it. Next time you perform an action that’s inconsistent with one of your attitudes, pay attention to the little voice inside your head that tries to justify your behavior. That little voice is your attempt to resolve cognitive dissonance.*  

- Page 69 (location ~ 1044-1052)    

*When the undercover researchers witnessed that surprising outcome, they tested that principle by conducting the experiment described in the beginning of the chapter (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959). In their experiment, they paid people who just completed a boring experiment either $1 or $20 to lie to new participants and claim that it was fun. Thus, people were asked to perform a behavior that was inconsistent with their inner attitude. The researchers wanted to examine how that inconsistency would influence their actual attitude toward the experiment, and the results revolutionized beliefs about human behavior. During that era, psychologists believed that greater rewards always led to greater attitude changes, but Festinger and Carlsmith’s study disputed that claim by demonstrating how a smaller reward can sometimes lead to a greater attitude change. Now that you’re more aware about cognitive dissonance, you can probably start to guess why people developed a more positive attitude toward the experiment when they were paid $1 to lie to the new participants. When people were asked to lie by claiming that the experiment was fun, they performed a behavior that was inconsistent with their attitude, and thus they experienced dissonance and became motivated to resolve that discomfort. How did they resolve it? Much like the cult members, people in the experiment couldn’t change their behavior (i.e., their participation in the experiment), so they changed the only thing that they could change: their attitude toward the experiment. People who were paid $1 regained consistency and resolved their dissonance by genuinely developing a more positive attitude toward the experiment. If they held a positive attitude toward it, then their behavior of telling the new participant that the experiment was “fun” would be consistent with that attitude. But wait! What about the $20 group? In that study, people who were paid $20 to lie to new participants didn’t develop any positive attitudes toward the experiment. What gives! Why did the $1 group find the experiment enjoyable, while the $20 group still thought the experiment was painfully boring? That difference occurred because people who were paid $20 could more easily justify why their behavior was inconsistent. When people were paid $20, there was a specific reason for their inconsistency (i.e., a large reward), and so they didn’t experience as much discomfort because they could easily attribute their inconsistent behavior to the large compensation. However, when people were only paid $1 to lie to the new participant, this small compensation wasn’t substantial enough to justify their inconsistent behavior, and so they experienced stronger discomfort and a stronger need to resolve that discomfort. Here’s the main takeaway. Whenever an attitude is inconsistent with our behavior, we feel a state of discomfort known as cognitive dissonance, and we become motivated to resolve it. Further, our motivation to resolve that discomfort becomes stronger when the reason for our inconsistency is weak (e.g., a small reward). If we have a valid reason for holding an inconsistent attitude (e.g., a large reward), we won’t feel as much pressure to change our attitude to match our behavior because we can easily justify our inconsistency.*  

- Page 70 (location ~ 1064-1090)    

*Researchers often refer to that phenomenon as “insufficient justification” (Shultz & Lepper, 1996). In order for people to develop a congruent attitude—whether it’s from their body language or behavior—they must believe that they are freely choosing their behavior, rather than being guided by some large external reward or threat. Too much justification won’t lead to cognitive dissonance because people could easily attribute their inconsistent attitude and behavior to that justification. Remember this concept because it’ll come back into play when we discuss incentives in Chapter*  

- Page 72 (location ~ 1104-1108)    

*Foot-in-the-Door Technique. Popularized by Robert Cialdini (2001), the foot-in-the-door technique can be a powerful persuasion tactic. When you need to persuade people to comply with a somewhat large request, you can put the odds in your favor by first asking them to comply with a smaller request. Because you’re more likely to gain their compliance with a smaller request, that initial compliance will cause them to develop a congruent attitude that suggests they are the type of person who would help you. When you later ask them to perform the larger request, they’ll be more likely to comply with it because they’ll feel pressure to remain consistent with their congruent attitude. Not complying with the larger request would be inconsistent with their new attitude, and so many people avoid that discomfort by maintaining consistency and complying with the larger request. The classic study that initially examined this principle can shed some more light (Freedman & Fraser, 1966). Under the guise of volunteer workers, two researchers tried to influence households to comply with a fairly large request: to install a large and ugly sign declaring “Drive Carefully” in their front yard. When they presented the request alone, the researchers were only able to influence 17 percent of people to comply. Since most people immediately rejected that type of odd and inconvenient request, how did the researchers manage to influence 76 percent of people in another group to comply? A few weeks before asking those people to install the large sign, the researchers asked them to instead comply with a smaller request: to install a small 3-inch sign that declared “Be a safe driver.” Nearly everyone who was asked to install that small sign complied because it was such a minor request.*  

- Page 73 (location ~ 1113-1127)    

*Lowball Procedure. In addition to using a small request to secure compliance with a separate larger request, you could also start with a small request, and once you gain the initial compliance, you can increase the size of that same request. This lowball procedure is a frequent tactic used by salespeople to influence their customers (Cialdini, 2001). In fact, you may have fallen prey to this tactic by a salesperson at a car dealership where this tactic is often used. You just negotiated a great deal with a car salesperson, and as he goes into the back office to write up the paperwork, you rejoice at having secured a fantastic bargain for your new car. In reality, however, the salesperson is probably twiddling his thumbs in the back room, waiting for time to pass so that you have a few moments to fantasize about your new car. After a few minutes pass, the salesperson returns with some unfortunate news: the manager didn’t approve the sale, and the fantastic “bargain” just increased by $500. However, by that point, the salesperson already sparked your momentum by gaining your initial compliance, and as a result, you will feel inertia pushing you toward continued compliance with that enlarged request.*  

- Page 75 (location ~ 1139-1149)    

*Suggest an Attitude. Rather than try to get your target to display certain behavior in order to trigger a congruent attitude, you can accomplish the same goal by subtly influencing your target to commit to holding a particular attitude. Getting him to outwardly claim that he’s in a pleasant mood, for example, can elicit behavior that’s consistent with a pleasant mood.*  

- Page 76 (location ~ 1151-1154)    

*How can you elicit that type of claim? It’s easier than you might think. Whenever we run into somebody, the first thing that we usually say is “How are you?”, and 99 times out of 100, this standard question is usually met with a “good” or “fine.” That’s just the social norm to which we’ve become accustomed. Someone could literally be having the worst day of his life, yet he would still probably make one of those standard responses. Despite that seemingly innocent and automatic response, outwardly committing to holding a “good”*  

- Page 76 (location ~ 1155-1159)    

*How can you elicit that type of claim? It’s easier than you might think. Whenever we run into somebody, the first thing that we usually say is “How are you?”, and 99 times out of 100, this standard question is usually met with a “good” or “fine.” That’s just the social norm to which we’ve become accustomed. Someone could literally be having the worst day of his life, yet he would still probably make one of those standard responses. Despite that seemingly innocent and automatic response, outwardly committing to holding a “good” attitude can make someone more likely to comply with a request. Once that “good” attitude*  

- Page 76 (location ~ 1155-1159)    

*I know what many of you are thinking right now (I’m a mind reader, remember?). You’re thinking that we’re so accustomed to responding with a “good” or “fine” that those statements have lost their actual meaning; they’re so automatic that they aren’t strong enough to actually change our attitude, let alone change our behavior and likelihood of complying with a request. You’d think so, but research tells us otherwise. In a study examining that particular strategy, Daniel Howard (1990) phoned residents of Texas and asked them if a representative from the Hunger Relief Committee could visit them to sell cookies. Among residents who were asked only that request, 18 percent agreed. However, among residents who were first asked “How are you feeling this evening?” and who answered with an affirmative response (e.g., “good” or “fine”), the percentage of people who complied nearly doubled to 32 percent. Residents were more likely to comply because they felt pressure to remain consistent with the positive attitude that they claimed to possess. The takeaway: next time that a police officer pulls you over, make sure to ask him how he’s doing that day.*  

- Page 76 (location ~ 1161-1169)    

*Normative Influence. Perhaps even more powerful than informational influence is normative influence, the pressure to conform to avoid certain social consequences. Unlike people in Sherif’s experiment, people in Asch’s experiment with the lines gave an answer that was different from their internal belief not because they distrusted their belief but because they felt pressure to avoid appearing deviant. In a follow-up experiment, people were told that they arrived late and that they should only write their answer, rather than publicly declare it like the other participants. Despite the exact same conditions, people didn’t conform when they were asked to only write their answer because their deviance remained undetected by the others (Asch, 1956). Therefore, not only do we conform to other people due to an internal change in our belief (informational influence), but we can also conform to avoid appearing deviant, which can often lead to social rejection. Why is social rejection so powerful? From a biological perspective, researchers have recently found that social rejection and physical pain share the same “neural circuitry” (the anterior cingulate cortex) (Eisenberger & Lieberman, 2004). Social rejection is so powerful because it’s literally painful. Pfft, yeah right, you may be thinking. If social rejection was physically painful, then I could just pop a Tylenol and feel better. Well . . . yeah . . . you can. Because social rejection shares the same brain circuitry as physical pain, Tylenol has been found to ease the painful feelings that can result from social rejection (Dewall et al., 2010).*  

- Page 83 (location ~ 1266-1279)    

*But something dangerously interesting happened when people believed that more participants were part of the intercom discussion. In addition to testing 2-person discussions, the researchers sometimes played recordings of other people over the intercom to make it seem like other people were participating in the discussion. Some people were led to believe that they were participating in groups of either 3 or 6 people. What the researchers found shed light on the tragedy with Kitty Genovese. When people believed that the discussions included more people, their likelihood of helping dropped dramatically. When people believed that they were the only person speaking to the seizure-prone participant, 85 percent of people left immediately to seek help. However, that percentage dropped to 62 percent in 3-person groups, and it dropped even further to 31 percent in 6-person groups. With more people present, the less people felt the need to actively seek help. We would rather listen to someone having a terrible seizure than to seek help. Why are we so heartless? It’s not that we’re heartless, but rather, it’s because we succumb to two main psychological forces that lower our tendency to help when there are more people present: Diffusion of Responsibility. In the experiment with the supposed seizure, nearly everyone sprung to action when they believed that they were the only person aware of the seizure because all responsibility rested on their shoulders. When they believed that more people were part of the discussion, however, responsibility was diffused across those people. With more people present, the less responsibility each individual felt because they assumed that someone else would seek help. With the 38 bystanders near Kitty Genovese’s death, they could all hear the rape and murder from inside their apartments, but no one sprung to action and called 911 because they falsely assumed that everyone else had already called. Audience Inhibition Effect. This second explanation stems from a potential embarrassment if we respond to a false “emergency.” If someone in the seizure study sought help and the person wasn’t actually having a seizure, then that would have felt somewhat embarrassing. People feel inclined not to seek help when a situation is ambiguous so that they can avoid a potential embarrassment. It’s truly mind-boggling how a miniscule moment of embarrassment could stand in the way of saving someone’s life.*  

- Page 86 (location ~ 1306-1325)    

*Do not succumb to social pressure when it comes to helping people. Always be an active bystander, even if a situation seems ambiguous. If someone appears to be in trouble, don’t diffuse the responsibility to other people. Realize that people are looking to you to determine how they should be acting, so if you don’t act, other people will be less likely to act. If you see someone lying on the side of a hallway, don’t assume that she’s sleeping because everyone else keeps walking by. Stop to make sure that she’s okay before moving on. Or if you’re ever in trouble yourself, don’t make a general plea for help. A general plea will only cause people to diffuse the responsibility. If you’re in desperate need of help, you should: (1) directly point to someone so that you destroy her cloud of anonymity within the crowd, and (2) give her a specific and direct request, such as to call 911. This strategy is the proper way to “persuade” someone to help you when the circumstances are dire.*  

- Page 87 (location ~ 1328-1336)    

*Because social norms aren’t set in stone, this flexibility allows you to alter the circumstances to convey a social norm for your particular situation. When researchers examined people’s tendency to litter, for example, they found that littering changed in direct proportion with the amount of litter already present. When they increased the pieces of litter on the ground from 1, 2, 4, and 8 pieces, the percentage of people who littered increased from 10 percent, 20 percent, 23 percent, and 41 percent, respectively (Cialdini, Reno, & Kallgren, 1990). With pieces of litter already present, people were more likely to follow the social norm of throwing their trash on the ground, but when fewer pieces of litter were present, people were more likely to follow the social norm of throwing trash into a trash bin. How can you apply that finding toward persuasion? Let’s use tipping and gratuity as an example. If you work in a place where there’s a tip jar on the counter, you can exert pressure on your customers to leave larger tips (or any tip for that matter) by placing a decent number of dollars in the jar at the beginning of the day. Not only will this money convey a social norm of generous tipping, but the dollars in the jar will also convey that the norm is to tip with dollars, rather than small coins.*  

- Page 88 (location ~ 1343-1353)    

*Whether it’s alcohol abuse, suicide, domestic violence, or any other harmful behavior, your attempts to prevent that harmful behavior will be much more effective when you point the norm toward the desired behavior, rather than the harmful behavior. The second statement would be much more effective at reducing alcohol abuse on that campus because it points the norm toward safe drinking, the desired behavior. As Robert Cialdini (2003) describes, “Within the statement ‘Many people are doing this undesirable thing’ lurks the powerful and under-cutting normative message ‘Many people are doing this.’” To summarize, when you want to encourage or discourage certain behavior in someone, you should point the norm toward the desired behavior. If you want to increase the size of your tips, demonstrate that most customers tip generously. If you want to discourage alcohol abuse, demonstrate that most students drink safely. Always point the norm in the direction that you want your target to follow. The next strategy will extend this discussion by explaining one specific and powerful social norm that you can use to add pressure on your target.*  

- Page 89 (location ~ 1365-1374)    

*Norm of Reciprocity. One of the most powerful social norms is reciprocity. There’s a reciprocal seesaw connecting us to other people, and it craves balance. When someone does a favor for us, the seesaw gets tilted in our direction, and we feel obligated to do something in return so that the teeter-totter can regain balance. This innate pressure can lead to some very powerful persuasion techniques. But first, why do we feel that pressure? We feel that reciprocal pressure for two reasons. First, by not reciprocating, we’re deviating from a social norm, which is an outcome that, as you learned in this chapter, can lead to painful feelings of social rejection. Thus, our reciprocation is our attempt to prevent any painful feelings that may result from the social rejection that occurs from not reciprocating (Cialdini, 2001). Second, even beyond that superficial motive, we feel an inner sense of obligation. When someone tilts the seesaw in our direction, we feel obliged to return the favor, even if that favor goes unnoticed. Jerry Burger and his colleagues (2009) tested that explanation by creating an experiment that was supposedly testing visual perception, and each trial included two students, unbeknownst to one of them that the other student was a confederate hired by the researchers.*  

- Page 90 (location ~ 1375-1385)    

*Compliments not only enhance your likability, but they also tilt the seesaw in your target’s direction. When someone compliments you, don’t you feel an urge to say or do something nice in return? It’s almost an automatic response. If someone compliments your outfit, for example, you’ll find yourself scanning that person’s clothing, hair, shoes, anything at all that seems appealing so that you can return the favor. Research even shows that compliments can lead to different forms of reciprocation, not just a reciprocal compliment. For instance, a few research studies have shown that complimenting customers resulted in larger tips, better product evaluations, and higher sales commissions (Seiter & Dutson, 2007; DeBono & Krim, 1997; Dunyon et al., 2010). If you’re a waiter or waitress, a simple compliment toward your customer’s food selection (e.g., “I’ve had that meal before, and it’s delicious. Great choice!”) can do wonders. There are three reasons, in particular, why that statement is so powerful: You convey high expectations for the meal. As a result of her heightened expectations, your customer is likely to develop a more favorable perception of the meal (explained in Chapter 3), thereby leading to a more pleasurable overall experience and possibly a larger tip. That simple compliment tilts the reciprocal teeter-totter in your customer’s direction, and it will exert greater pressure to give back. What better way to give back than to leave a generous tip?*  

- Page 92 (location ~ 1409-1421)    

*One of the most powerful factors that can influence your chances of gaining compliance is the amount of rapport that exists between you and your target. The more he likes you, the greater your chances of succeeding; the less he likes you, the lower your chances of succeeding. Although the title of this chapter could have been titled, “Build Greater Rapport,” the topic of building rapport is extremely broad, so this chapter focuses on explaining the single most effective strategy: emphasizing similarities that you share with your target (for a more comprehensive explanation of rapport-building techniques, refer to Dale Carnegie’s classic book, How to Win Friends and Influence People).*  

- Page 94 (location ~ 1437-1443)    

*Our psychological compulsion to gravitate toward similarities is so powerful that it can even dictate our lives. How so? In a fascinating study, Pelham, Mirenberg, and Jones (2002) found some peculiar surprises: People named Dennis are disproportionately more likely to become dentists, and people named George or Geoffrey are disproportionately more likely to work in fields of the geosciences (e.g., geology). Roofers are 70 percent more likely to have names beginning with the letter R, and hardware store owners are 80 percent more likely to have names beginning with the letter H. People named Philip, Jack, Mildred, and Virginia are more likely to reside in Philadelphia, Jacksonville, Milwaukee, and Virginia Beach, respectively. Needless to say, similarities are another powerful force that nonconsciously guide our behavior.*  

- Page 95 (location ~ 1447-1456)    

*Implicit Egotism. Although evolution is one explanation, the explanation that has garnered the most support is implicit egotism, a concept suggesting that we all possess an underlying sense of self-centeredness (Pelham, Carvallo, & Jones, 2005). Due to our egotistical nature, we possess a hidden psychological urge to gravitate toward things that resemble us in any way. People named Dennis are more likely to become dentists because they developed an affinity toward the letters in their name, and that affinity guided their behavior toward an occupation containing the same letters from their name (Nuttin, 1985). It might sound ludicrous, but there’s ample evidence that shows our profound affinity toward the letters in our name, a concept known as the name-letter effect. Research shows that consumers significantly prefer brand names containing the same letters in their name (Brendl, et al., 2005), and this effect is so strong that those brands influence how people consume those products. For example, one study found that people named Jonathan will consume more of a Japanese drink called “Joitoki” (Holland et al., 2009). Even beyond the name-letter effect, more support for implicit egotism can be found in our failure to recognize our own face. Imagine that someone took a picture of you and manipulated it to make new versions of that picture. Some pictures made you look more attractive, whereas other pictures made you look less attractive. If you were then presented with a line-up of your attractive and unattractive distortions, would you be able to recognize your actual picture? Of course, right? Well, it turns out that it might be harder than you think.*  

- Page 96 (location ~ 1466-1479)    

*As expected, the percentage of compliance with the English assignment increased according to the rareness of the fingerprint. When people remained unaware that they shared a similar fingerprint, the percentage of compliance was 48 percent. When people discovered that they shared a similar yet common fingerprint, the percentage of compliance rose to 55 percent. When people discovered that they shared a similar and rare fingerprint, the percentage of compliance rose dramatically to 82 percent. Although any similarity will make your target more likely to comply with a request, that pressure increases in accordance with the rarity of that similarity. But you should also keep in mind that the similarity doesn’t need to be relevant or important, only uncommon (e.g., a rare fingerprint). How can you apply that principle? If you’re meeting your target for the first time, take a moment to learn about her: ask about her life, her interests, and anything else. Not only does this action show interest (another technique to build rapport), but more importantly, it allows you to pinpoint similarities that you might share with your target. Upon discovering a similarity, don’t hesitate to reveal that shared similarity so that you can appeal to her implicit egotism, especially if that similarity is uncommon. Even if the similarities seem irrelevant or unimportant (e.g., a shared first name, mutual friend, similar interest, etc.), those incidental similarities can dramatically boost your persuasion.*  

- Page 99 (location ~ 1503-1517)    

*Ingroup Favoritism. A second application of similarities can be found in ingroup favoritism, the tendency for people to prefer groups that share a similar characteristic to themselves. Whether you attend the same school, play on the same sports team, or share the same hotel room, research shows that people generally prefer (and are more persuaded by) members of ingroups. In fact, when we merely view faces of people from an ingroup, there’s greater neural activity in our orbitofrontal cortex, the brain region associated with rewards (Van Bavel, Packer, & Cunningham, 2008). Research shows that we’re easily persuaded by members of ingroups and easily dissuaded by members of outgroups. Consider a fascinating experiment. Imagine that you and a stranger are participating in a taste test, and both of you are allowed to take as much food as you want. The stranger takes a certain amount of food and walks away, and you’re left standing in front of the food, contemplating how much to take. Researchers found that the amount of food you take would be greatly influenced by the characteristics of the other person and how much food she took (McFerran et al., 2010b). In that study, the stranger was actually a thin female confederate. In some trials, she was her normal thin self, but in other trials, she wore a professionally-designed prosthesis (a suit that made her look overweight). The researchers wanted to examine how her body type—thin vs. overweight—would influence people’s decision about how much food to take, and the results were startling.*  

- Page 100 (location ~ 1533-1545)    

*When trying to persuade someone, how can you demonstrate that you belong to the same ingroup? Not only can you use the first technique of revealing any type of similarity, but you could also simply use words like “we” and “us” to reinforce that you belong to the same ingroup. Research shows that these pronouns can trigger a feeling of pleasure because they convey that you belong to the same ingroup (Perdue et al. 1990). When I was editing this book, I realized that I was explaining many of the psychological principles using 3rd person examples (e.g., “people experience implicit egotism”), and so I went through and changed all of the wording to 1st person examples (e.g., “we experience implicit egotism”). Did it help create rapport between me and you? Who knows. But it definitely didn’t hurt.*  

- Page 102 (location ~ 1559-1565)    

*The underlying principle behind that phenomenon is known as the ideomotor response, and it’s our tendency to perform behavior upon merely thinking about that behavior. People who are more easily affected by the ideomotor response will exhibit greater movement in their hands when they simply imagine their hands moving closer together. But the ideomotor response also applies to areas beyond mere body movements. For example, thinking about aggression can trigger aggressive behavior (much like priming), which is one of the key reasons why violence in video games and movies can increase aggressive behavior in children (Anderson & Bushman, 2001). How does this principle relate to similarities? When we speak with people, we examine their nonverbal behavior and experience a hidden psychological urge to mimic that behavior. If someone is speaking with his arms crossed, you may soon find yourself with your own arms crossed. If that person is speaking with an enthusiastic tone, you may find yourself using a similar upbeat tone. Though it occurs outside of our conscious awareness, this chameleon effect is a key element in building rapport (Lakin et al., 2003). Not only do we tend to mimic people that we like, but we also like people more when they mirror our own nonverbal behavior. In fact, researchers found the following outcomes when people imitated nonverbal behavior: Waitresses gained higher tips (Van Baaren et al., 2003). Sales clerks achieved higher sales and more positive evaluations (Jacob et al., 2011). More students agreed to write an essay for another student (Guéguen, Martin, & Meineri, 2011). Men evaluated women more favorably in speed dating (Guéguen, 2009). Thus, not only do “incidental similarities” result in a greater likelihood to comply with a request, but so too does similar nonverbal behavior.*  

- Page 103 (location ~ 1580-1597)    

*There are two basic strategies you can use to take advantage of this principle. The first should be pretty obvious: to gain compliance, you should build greater rapport by mimicking your target’s nonverbal behavior. Commonly used by therapists to convey empathy (Catherall, 2004), this strategy has been implemented in various settings with remarkable success (as you can see in the previous list of experimental outcomes). Due to the powerful impact of mimicking nonverbal behavior, you should always strive to make your request in person. Although that advice may sound somewhat foreign due to our technology- and e-mail-obsessed society, you’re more likely to gain compliance when you make a request in person (Drolet & Morris, 2000). If your situation isn’t conducive for an in-person interaction (e.g., far distance), you should use video conferencing or, at the very least, a phone call. The more nonverbal cues that are available, the more easily you can mimic them to build rapport with your target, which will increase your chances of gaining compliance. To understand the second strategy of mimicry, think back to the concept of congruent attitudes and how we infer our attitudes by observing our body language and behavior. Remarkably, research reveals that we sometimes infer our attitudes by observing the behavior of others who we perceive to be similar to us. Using an EEG (a brainwave recording device), Noah Goldstein and Robert Cialdini (2007) led people to believe that they shared similar brainwave patterns with a student who appeared in a video interview, an interview that depicted the student’s altruistic efforts toward helping the homeless. When the researchers asked participants to complete a questionnaire after watching the interview, people who were informed of the similar EEG patterns not only rated themselves to be more self-sacrificing and sensitive, but they were also significantly more likely to help the researchers in an additional study.*  

- Page 105 (location ~ 1601-1616)    

*If your target perceives you to be similar, she will develop attitudes that are congruent with your behavior. Therefore, if your target perceives you to be similar, you should display behavior that’s consistent with the attitude that you’re trying to extract from your target. For instance, if one of your close friends is starting to struggle in school, you should make an effort to have occasional study sessions together, even if you’re not in the same class. The simple exposure to seeing you study might help your friend develop a genuine interest in studying more, which could help boost her grades. Even if you simply talk about your interest in the material from your class, you could help your friend develop a congruent attitude that she’s also interested in the material from her classes.*  

- Page 106 (location ~ 1618-1624)    

*You’ve probably experienced similar situations in your own life. Have you ever heard a song for the first time that you immediately disliked? Then, after listening to it a few times, you actually begin to enjoy it? How about when you meet someone for the first time? Maybe you dislike him at first, but after meeting him a few times, his personality starts to grow on you? These situations occur frequently, and they can be explained by a psychological principle. The mere exposure effect, also known as the familiarity principle, suggests that we develop greater positive feelings toward a stimulus if we’re repeatedly exposed to it. The more often you encounter a stimulus (e.g., beer, song, person), the more appealing and likable that stimulus generally becomes. Though it may appear counterintuitive to our current beliefs (such as the popular phrase, “familiarity breeds contempt”), ample evidence has shown that repeated exposures to a stimulus lead to a more favorable perception of that stimulus. This chapter sheds light on why that’s the case.*  

- Page 111 (location ~ 1689-1697)    

*In fact, the mere exposure effect is stronger when the exposures occur nonconsciously (Zajonc, 2001). How could something that we don’t even perceive create a stronger effect? The answer lies in the affective primacy hypothesis, a concept suggesting that our emotional responses can be triggered before our cognitive responses. Mere exposure becomes stronger for exposures that occur outside of our conscious awareness because those exposures trigger an emotional response without triggering a cognitive response. They enhance mere exposure because whenever we consciously evaluate something, we attach other meanings and associations to that stimulus, thereby altering (and possibly degrading) our evaluation of it. Nonconscious exposures prevent those potentially harmful associations, and so they often produce more powerful effects than conscious exposures.*  

- Page 112 (location ~ 1712-1719)    

*Besides evolution, however, there are a few other reasons why the mere exposure effect is so powerful. The two main explanations are classical conditioning and processing fluency (Zajonc, 2001). Because classical conditioning is described in the final chapter, this section will focus on processing fluency, a very interesting principle in psychology. Processing Fluency. It might seem like a strange request, but you’ll gain a much better understanding of processing fluency if you take a few minutes to write a list of 12 specific instances in your life where you acted assertively. Go ahead; I’ll wait. Do you have your list? Like most people, you probably thought of a few instances very easily, but with each new example, you probably found it increasingly difficult to think of new instances. Surprisingly, that difficulty in retrieval influenced how you perceived your level of assertiveness. Researchers conducted that same exercise with people, except they asked one group to think of 12 instances, and they asked a different group to think of only 6 instances. What do you think happened when the researchers later asked those people to rate their own assertiveness? Though you might be inclined to think that people who listed 12 instances found themselves to be more assertive, the opposite actually occurred: people who listed only 6 instances viewed themselves to be significantly more assertive than people who listed 12 instances (Schwarz et al., 1991). The answer to that odd finding can be found in processing fluency—the ease and speed with which we process information (Reber, Schwarz, & Winkielman, 2004). If you followed the exercise and listed 12 instances of your assertiveness, you likely experienced difficulty in generating new instances the farther along you went. That perceived difficulty is the answer. The difficulty you experienced in generating new instances became a subtle cue that caused you to develop a congruent attitude that you must not be assertive. You nonconsciously said, “Hmm. If I’m an assertive person, then I should have no problem listing instances. But I am having trouble listing instances. Therefore, I must not be assertive.” The people who only listed 6 instances, on the other hand, didn’t experience as much difficulty generating examples, so their nonconscious developed the opposite attitude: “Hmm. If I’m an assertive person, then I should have no problem listing instances. I’m not having trouble listing instances. Therefore, I must be assertive.”*  

- Page 113 (location ~ 1729-1749)    

*The researchers presented those two sentences to people and asked them to focus solely on the last word (i.e., “boat”) and rate it on a pleasantness scale. Even though the question was essentially the same, people who were exposed to the second sentence rated “boat” to be significantly more pleasant (Whittlesea, 1993). That result occurred because of conceptual fluency, a type of processing fluency related to how easily information comes to our mind (Alter & Oppenheimer, 2009). Generally, the faster a concept enters our mind, the more we tend to like it. Because the second sentence used particular words to prime the context, this heightened predictability caused the concept of “boat” to enter people’s minds more easily, and that ease of processing produced a pleasant feeling that became misattributed to the word “boat.” Top-level marketers spend millions of dollars each year trying to take advantage of conceptual fluency. If we’re deciding between two possible brands to purchase, we’re likely to base our decision on how easily each brand comes to mind. When our opinion of two brands is the same, we’re more likely to purchase the brand that comes to our mind more easily because that heightened conceptual fluency feels pleasant, and we mistakenly attribute that pleasantness to the brand (Nedungadi, 1990). Marketers can take advantage of conceptual fluency and enhance the effectiveness of their advertisements by strategically positioning their ads in predictive contexts. For example, one study showed that consumers found a ketchup ad more favorable when the ad was presented after an ad for mayonnaise (Lee & Labroo, 2004). The mayonnaise ad primed consumers’ schema for condiments, and when the ad for ketchup was presented afterward, the idea of ketchup came to their minds more easily. As a result of that heightened conceptual fluency, consumers developed a more positive attitude toward the ketchup advertisement.*  

- Page 116 (location ~ 1775-1790)    

*How can you apply that technique in your own life? You can increase your chances of persuading someone to comply with a request by casually mentioning the topic of your request immediately prior to making it. Similar to the mayonnaise ad, the general topic will increase your target’s conceptual fluency for your request, and as a result, your request will seem more appealing because it will come to your target’s mind more easily. Your target will then misattribute that ease of processing with a desire to comply with your request. Suppose that your favorite band is coming to town, and you want to persuade your friend to go to the concert with you next month. However, your friend doesn’t really like the band, so you expect to encounter some resistance. In this situation, don’t rush and hastily make your request now; instead, periodically bring up the idea of concerts in general for the next few days. With repeated exposure to that general topic, your friend will gradually develop a more positive attitude toward concerts in general, and he will be less resistant when you make your actual request. Also, because of conceptual fluency, the idea of accompanying you to the concert will enter his mind more easily when you eventually make your request, and he will mistakenly attribute that higher conceptual fluency with a desire to go to the concert.*  

- Page 117 (location ~ 1790-1800)    

*Two researchers conducted a neat field experiment to test that claim (Moreland & Beach, 1992). The researchers asked four female students to be confederates in an experiment, and their job was to attend a predetermined number of classes in a psychology course (0, 5, 10, or 15 classes). Because they were instructed not to interact with other students, and because the classes were held in a large lecture hall, their presence was unnoticed by most students. At the end of the semester, the researchers showed students a picture of each confederate that attended the class, and they asked the students to evaluate the four females. Despite possessing only vague memories, if any, for those confederates, students perceived the confederates to be more similar and attractive with the more classes they attended. When we’re in the mere general vicinity of someone more often, that person is likely to find us more attractive! Sure, you may be thinking, people might prefer a photograph if they’ve been exposed to it before. Heck, people might even find someone more attractive if they were repeatedly exposed to that person. But is this effect strong enough to influence our actual behavior? Good question. Repeated exposures, even if they occur nonconsciously, can exert tremendous influence on our behavior as well. Remember the researchers who conducted the experiment with the geometric shapes? They conducted a follow-up experiment where they instructed people to read anonyms poems and collaborate with two other participants to make a unanimous decision regarding the gender of the anonymous poet. However, only one person was an actual participant in the experiment; the other two people were confederates hired by the researchers. They were instructed to disagree with each other, which would force the actual participant to then choose a side.*  

- Page 119 (location ~ 1817-1831)    

*Though I wasn’t able to incorporate those font changes due to the complexity of the formatting, editing, and publishing process, how the heck would that concept even relate to this chapter? When you know that people will perceive your request to be unfavorable, you can sometimes habituate that request in small, incremental steps so that you can eventually integrate your entire message without their awareness. Because those font changes would have been so small, most readers would have remained completely oblivious to those changes. However, if they were to compare the beginning font with the end font, the difference would have been remarkable. This chapter will teach you exactly when and why many people become blind to certain changes and how you can present your message so that your target will become blind to negative aspects of your message.*  

- Page 121 (location ~ 1848-1854)    

*Gradual Changes. First, it’s very difficult to detect changes that occur in small increments. There’s a concept known as the just noticeable difference (or the difference threshold), which refers to the minimum amount of change that’s needed in a stimulus in order for people to detect that change (Ono, 1967). If you wanted, you could conduct a number of experiments to figure out the exact level of change that’s needed for people to actually notice that a specific stimulus has been altered. Once you know the minimum percentage of change that triggers detection, you can make a change in your stimulus that’s below that “just noticeable difference” so that your change remains undetected. The previous wording may sound funky, so here’s an example to illustrate. Suppose that you need to increase the price of a product that you sell, but you don’t want that price increase to attract attention from consumers. You could conduct some experiments to determine the exact price point that people start to notice that increase in price, and you can then increase your price to a point below that “just noticeable difference” so that you minimize the number of people who notice your price increase.*  

- Page 122 (location ~ 1862-1872)    

*Simons and Levin (1998) showed the alarming extent of our inability to detect change when we can’t perform a side-by-side comparison. When a researcher asked a random passerby on the street for directions, two workers carrying a very large painting walked between them, and unbeknownst to the passerby, the researcher changed places with one of the workers behind the large painting. The goal was to find out how many people would continue the conversation with no idea that they were talking to a new person. Take a guess at the percentage of people who were completely oblivious to the fact that they were talking to a new person. 5 percent? 10 percent? 15 percent? Nope. An astonishing 50 percent of people failed to notice that they were talking to an entirely different person! Our ability to detect change becomes dramatically weakened when we can’t compare the new stimulus to the original stimulus.*  

- Page 123 (location ~ 1884-1892)    

*Let’s look at an example that combines all three facets of change blindness. All three reasons discussed in this section—gradual changes, side-by-side comparisons, and expectations—can explain the mystery of the potato chip bag. Weren’t potato chip bags much larger at one point? Indeed they were. Why did we fail to notice those reductions in size? First, marketers gradually reduced the size of the bag, and those changes were so small that most people failed to notice those changes. Second, unless people had a collection of potato chip bags in their home (which I’m assuming is a small percentage of people, but you never know . . .), people weren’t able to perform a side-by-side comparison of the original bags with the newer bags. Third, marketers changed the size to avoid changing something that people do typically notice: prices. Although we’re constantly on guard about potential price increases, we don’t typically “expect” the size of potato chip bags to change, so marketers cleverly took advantage of our diverted attention.*  

- Page 124 (location ~ 1899-1910)    

*Do you have a phobia that you want to overcome? Systematic desensitization works on adults as well. Researchers in one case study explained how they helped a woman overcome her severe phobia of spiders by exposing her to increasingly stressful spider-related stimuli (Carlin, Hoffman, & Weghorst, 1997). Over the span of a few months, they started by simply talking about spiders and then gradually increased to exposing photographs of spiders, fake toy spiders, and even spiders in virtual reality. By the end of the therapy, the researchers had resolved the woman’s incapacitating fear of spiders. That’s great, Nick. But how does that relate to persuasion? I’m glad you asked. Remember how I mentioned the example of parents persuading their kids to enjoy vegetables? If your kids really enjoy a particular meal—a meal that could easily be tweaked to incorporate vegetables—you could add a miniscule amount of vegetables the next time you cook that meal. With only a miniscule amount, your kids might eat the meal without asking any questions.*  

- Page 126 (location ~ 1923-1931)    

*To summarize, if you want people to develop a favorable (or even neutral) attitude toward something that you know they will find unfavorable, you can “desensitize” your message by gradually habituating that message. This technique will be even more effective if: (1) the changes occur in small and gradual increments, (2) your target can’t perform a side-by-side comparison, (3) your target isn’t expecting any changes to occur, or (4) you combine the unfavorable stimulus with a pleasant stimulus (e.g., combining the candy with the rabbit, combining the yummy meal with the addition of vegetables).*  

- Page 127 (location ~ 1940-1944)    

*OVERVIEW: OPTIMIZE YOUR MESSAGE Look at that! We finally made it to the request. Let’s do a quick recap to summarize the four steps that brought you here: First, you molded your target’s mindset though priming, anchoring, and expectations, which helped you trigger a more favorable perception. Second, you changed your target’s body language and behavior to reflect someone who would comply with your request, which helped you extract a congruent attitude. As a result, your target has become much more likely to comply with your request to maintain consistency with that new attitude. Third, you emphasized social norms and built greater rapport so that you could exert additional pressure on your target. Fourth, you used repeated exposures and desensitization to habituate your target to your message. With heightened familiarity toward the topic of your request, your target has become even more likely to comply with it. This next step in METHODS will teach you the proper way to present your message or request. Specifically, you’ll learn how people typically evaluate messages depending on the circumstances, and you’ll learn how to properly tweak your message so that it complements how your target will evaluate your message.*  

- Page 130 (location ~ 1981-1994)    

*Whether it’s beneficial or harmful for your situation, people evaluate information differently depending on the circumstances. This chapter will teach you the two most basic ways that people evaluate messages and how you can trigger the most favorable type of evaluation for your situation.*  

- Page 131 (location ~ 2008-2010)    

*Systematic Processing. When the boss analyzed and scrutinized the report, she was using systematic processing, an effortful evaluation that involves critically analyzing information. When we use systematic processing (also known as the central route to persuasion), we’re more influenced by the underlying arguments and content of information.*  

- Page 132 (location ~ 2013-2016)    

*don’t always do that. Heuristic Processing. When the boss judged the monthly report by lightly flipping through the pages, she was using heuristic processing, a simple-minded evaluation that relies on quick decision rules. When we use heuristic processing (also known as the peripheral route to persuasion), we’re more influenced by simple, irrelevant, and “peripheral” cues, such as: The sheer amount of information or support The aesthetics of a message The person presenting the message (e.g., his likability, attractiveness, perceived expertise, etc.) Those peripheral cues don’t necessarily relate to the strength of a message, yet people often use those “heuristics” to make quick judgments about the overall content of information.*  

- Page 132 (location ~ 2021-2030)    

*Motivation. The first factor is someone’s motivation to evaluate your message. When your target’s motivation is high, your message will be evaluated using systematic processing; when your target’s motivation is low, your message will be evaluated using heuristic processing. It might seem like an obvious conclusion, but what exactly determines someone’s motivation? Perhaps the most important aspect is the perceived importance of your message. Your target will be more motivated to critically evaluate your message when they view that information as important to understand. Consider this book as an example. When people read the sales description for Methods of Persuasion, which type of evaluation—systematic or heuristic—do you think most people use? Though I’d like to think that people carefully evaluate the description of my book, with all else being equal, people are likely to base their purchase decision on a simple-minded evaluation. Why? Most people don’t view a book purchase to be a life-altering event; there are very few significant outcomes for their compliance (or lack thereof). Rather than carefully read the description or seek information elsewhere on the web, they’re likely to base their decision on irrelevant heuristics, such as the number of positive reviews or my perceived popularity. Some of you might be questioning the previous claim because you can remember instances where you did decide to purchase a book based on a careful evaluation of the description. Though it might seem like a discrepancy, you need to remember that circumstances (e.g., a book purchase) don’t determine how your message is evaluated; it’s the level of motivation in someone.*  

- Page 133 (location ~ 2037-2051)    

*Ability. Your target’s ability to evaluate is the second factor that determines how your message is evaluated. This section explains two aspects of someone’s ability: their intellectual capacity and opportunity to evaluate. Intellectual Capacity. One aspect of people’s ability to evaluate is their intellectual capacity, which is different than general intelligence. If I was listening to a speech on supersymmetric quantum mechanics, I would have absolutely no idea what the speaker was talking about. Does that mean I’m stupid? No. It simply means that I don’t know enough about that specific topic.*  

- Page 134 (location ~ 2052-2058)    

*Opportunity. The second aspect of your target’s ability to evaluate is related to external constraints. If your target is lacking time or if there are many distractions, then she will speed up her evaluation by relying on peripheral cues, such as your likability and attractiveness.*  

- Page 135 (location ~ 2061-2063)    

*This step in METHODS will teach you two overall strategies to apply that knowledge toward successful persuasion; you can either: Alter your target’s motivation or ability to ensure that your message is evaluated in the most favorable manner (explained in this chapter), or you can . . . Use your knowledge of the previous factors to predict how your target will evaluate your message so that you can tweak your message accordingly (explained in the next chapter). In this first persuasion strategy, you alter the factors that you learned in the previous section to ensure that your target evaluates your message in the most favorable manner (whether that evaluation is systematic or heuristic processing). If there are strong reasons why your target should comply with your request, you should ensure that your target evaluates those reasons using systematic processing. On the other hand, if you think that the odds are stacked against you because your arguments are very weak, then don’t worry . . . you’re not completely screwed yet!*  

- Page 136 (location ~ 2072-2081)    

*HOW TO ELICIT SYSTEMATIC PROCESSING There are many ways to alter your target’s motivation and ability so that they use systematic processing. This section will describe two example strategies: grab someone’s attention and increase the relevance of your message. Grab Their Attention. People consistently function on autopilot. Do you ever hang up on telemarketers without actually listening to what they’re selling? When you present a request to people, they will often feel a natural reflex to immediately reject your request because that’s the reaction to which they’ve become accustomed. In order to prevent that mindless refusal and elicit an effortful evaluation of your message, you need to first successfully grab their attention. How? Here are three simple techniques that you can use to capture someone’s attention: Give ’Em Caffeine. Wait, caffeine? What the heck are you supposed to do—ask your target if she wants a cup of coffee before you make your request? Well, why not? It couldn’t*  

- Page 136 (location ~ 2083-2093)    

*Enhance Message Aesthetics. If a caffeinated drink is out of the question, research also shows that enhancing the aesthetics of your message can also grab people’s attention so that they pay more attention to your underlying arguments (MacInnis, Moorman, & Jaworski, 1991). You’ve probably been watching television when a visually stunning commercial appears and grabs your attention. Once it grabs your attention, you think that it might contain an important or compelling message, and so you pay more attention to that commercial.*  

- Page 137 (location ~ 2098-2102)    

*Pique Technique. One final technique to capture your target’s attention is the pique technique. Rather than plainly state an ordinary request, you can present your request in an odd manner to snap your target out of her autopilot state of mind. To test that claim, research assistants disguised themselves as beggars and asked people on the street for either 17 cents, a quarter, 37 cents, or “any change.” What’s interesting is that the “beggars” received more money when the request was unusual (17 cents and 37 cents) because people on the street were yanked from autopilot, and they were forced to evaluate the odd request instead of mindlessly refusing it (Santos, Leve, & Pratkanis, 1994).*  

- Page 138 (location ~ 2102-2108)    

*One basic technique involves describing the consequences of your message, especially in a vivid manner. For example, commercials about driver safety are much more effective when they show vivid images of bloody victims, rather than images of test dummies (Rogers & Mewborn, 1976).*  

- Page 138 (location ~ 2111-2113)    

*Use 2nd Person Pronouns. Research in advertising shows that using the word “you” in a message can dramatically increase the persuasiveness of an advertisement. For instance, when people evaluated an advertisement for a calculator, they developed a significantly more favorable attitude toward the calculator when the researchers used 2nd person pronouns (e.g., “You know that calculator technology . . . ,” “You may remember . . .”) compared to neutral statements (e.g., “If a mistake was made . . .”) (Burnkrant & Unnava, 1995).*  

- Page 138 (location ~ 2116-2120)    

*Tell a Story. Do you ever wonder why television advertisers try to communicate their product benefits by depicting a story or narrative with characters/actors? Why not simply describe the benefits of their product instead? When television viewers watch a narrative commercial, they empathize with the characters (especially if they view them to be similar), and viewers start to picture themselves using the product in their own life (Deighton, Romer, & McQueen, 1989).*  

- Page 139 (location ~ 2120-2124)    

*Ask Rhetorical Questions. Have you wondered why I ask so many rhetorical questions throughout this book, such as this rhetorical question that you’re reading right now? I use a lot of rhetorical questions because they spark greater personal relevance. When students were exposed to a message arguing for a comprehensive exam for seniors, they were more persuaded when the arguments were presented in a rhetorical manner (e.g., “Don’t you agree that . . . ,” “Isn’t it true that . . .”) because those questions subtly influenced students to relate the arguments to their own life (Petty, Cacioppo, & Heesacker, 1981).*  

- Page 139 (location ~ 2124-2129)    

*HOW TO ELICIT HEURISTIC PROCESSING If the arguments in your message are fairly weak, you’ll want to elicit a greater reliance on heuristic processing. How can you do that? It might be easier than you think. If you picture your target as a computer program, her default setting is heuristic processing. In other words, if you don’t do anything to increase her motivation or ability, she will typically default to evaluating your request in a simple-minded manner. But if you want to further enhance this reliance, you can implement a few techniques to subtly dissuade your target from relying on systematic processing. Three example strategies include increasing the complexity of your message, enhancing their mood, and sparking their arousal. Increase Message Complexity. When it comes to persuasion, we’re usually told to make our message as clear as possible. Surprisingly, however, that’s not always the best strategy. There are some situations where increasing the complexity of your message can actually help you persuade your target. That notion can help explain why people are more likely to buy gourmet cheese if an advertisement describes it in a difficult-to-read font, compared to an easy-to-read font (Pocheptsova, Labroo, & Dhar, 2010). The explanation to that odd finding can be found in processing fluency. Remember how people misattribute their evaluation of information to the ease and speed with which they process that information? I explained how people who list 12 instances of their assertiveness perceive themselves to be less assertive (compared to people who list 6 instances) because they misattributed their difficulty in generating examples to a low level of assertiveness. People make similar misattributions when they view advertisements for unique products, such as gourmet cheese. People were more likely to purchase a gourmet cheese when an advertisement described it in a difficult-to-read font because people misattributed the difficulty in processing to the uniqueness of the cheese, a perception that made it seem more appealing. When the advertisement was depicting an everyday cheese, that effect disappeared; people were more likely to purchase an everyday cheese when the advertisement described it in an easy-to-read font because that ease of processing generated feelings of familiarity. Processing fluency and message complexity can also enhance the perception of other stimuli. Consider a research study that involved a description of an online coaching service that helps students apply to graduate school. Students perceived that service to be more valuable and they were more willing to pay for a one-year subscription when the coaching service was presented using a light blue font with a white background (a difficult-to-read display) compared to when it was presented using a black font with a white background (an easy-to-read display). Students developed a more favorable evaluation of the coaching service when it was presented in a difficult-to-read format because they misattributed their difficulty in processing to the difficulty in applying to graduate school, a perception that sparked a greater need for the coaching service (Thompson & Chandon Ince, 2013).*  

- Page 139 (location ~ 2132-2156)    

*Enhance Their Mood. Another factor that can decrease people’s motivation to evaluate a message is their mood. Generally, people who are in happy moods are less likely to critically evaluate a message (Bless et al., 1990). When we’re in positive moods, we often develop a sense of naïve optimism. For example, one factor that perpetuates a financial bubble is irrational exuberance, a term coined by Alan Greenspan, former chairman of the Federal Reserve. During the “dot-com bubble” in the late 90s, stock prices of Internet companies skyrocketed over several years, rising to a point where the underlying financials of those companies didn’t support the overinflated stock prices. As stock prices continued to soar, people developed a sense of naïve optimism and irrational exuberance. The positive emotions they experienced from their large gains led to a false assumption that stock prices would continue to rise, a perception that blinded them to the imminent burst of the bubble and the resulting depletion of their bank accounts.*  

- Page 141 (location ~ 2162-2169)    

*Spark Their Arousal. Get your mind out of the gutter. This “arousal” is different than the sexual type of arousal, and this arousal can spark heuristic processing. To understand this type of arousal, you first need to understand another concept. As humans, we think that we possess a solid grasp of our own emotions and feelings, and we tend to believe that all types of emotions—sadness, excitement, fear, etc.—produce different sensations and feelings within us. What’s surprising is that many of those emotions produce the same exact physiological response. If they produce the same biological reactions, why do they feel so different? Stanley Schachter and Jerome Singer (1962) proposed their two-factor theory of emotion to explain that we interpret emotional responses in two steps. First, we experience some general physiological arousal in response to a stimulus, and this “arousal” is usually characterized by a rapid heartbeat, heavy breathing, sweaty palms, and other symptoms that are related to higher adrenaline. Second, after experiencing that state of arousal, we then look to the situation to interpret that state of arousal, and we label that arousal with the emotion that seems most fitting. Consider two scenarios. In the first scenario, you’re walking down an alley late at night in a dangerous city, and out of the darkness appears a man with a gun asking for all of your money. In this situation, nearly all humans would feel a very powerful state of arousal, characterized by a rapid heartbeat, heavy breathing, sweaty palms, etc. In the other scenario, suppose that you bought a lottery ticket, and you’re sitting at home waiting for the numbers to be called. The television host appears, announces the numbers, and you realize that all of your numbers match. You just won $50 million dollars. How would your body react? You’d probably experience a rapid heartbeat, heavy breathing, sweaty palms, and virtually all other symptoms that occurred when you were robbed.*  

- Page 142 (location ~ 2176-2192)    

*HOW TO TWEAK YOUR MESSAGE FOR SYSTEMATIC PROCESSING Unlike heuristic processing, which can be enhanced through many different aspects, systematic processing can only be enhanced through one main aspect: the strength of your message. If you predict that your target will have high motivation and ability to evaluate your message, then you need to focus on building stronger supporting arguments. If you’re in a situation where you can’t improve the strength of your reasons, then you have two options. First, you can rely on the persuasion strategy in the previous chapter and decrease your target’s motivation and ability (e.g., decrease personal relevance, don’t grab their attention, etc.) so that they evaluate your message in a more simple-minded manner. The other option, however, is to enhance the perceived strength of your arguments. Luckily, there are a few very simple adjustments you can make to most messages that will enhance the perceived strength of the content. This section describes two techniques: using two-sided arguments and sequencing arguments properly.*  

- Page 145 (location ~ 2216-2224)    

*Present Two-Sided Arguments. Counterintuitive to our current beliefs, presenting a little bit of negative information about your message can actually benefit you. Research shows that two-sided arguments (arguments that present both positive and negative aspects of a message) can produce favorable changes in attitude and behavior (Rucker, Petty, & Briñol, 2008). When a message contains only positive support, people tend to believe that the message is purposely excluding information, which causes them to be skeptical toward that message. On the other hand, when a message contains a small amount of negative information, people develop stronger attitudes because they believe that the information is more complete. When the situation is suitable, you should include a small amount of negative information in your message (as well as arguments to address and counter that negative information) because people will assume that you’ve considered both sides of the topic, and as a result, you’ll be able to persuade them more easily.*  

- Page 146 (location ~ 2225-2233)    

*Properly Sequence Your Arguments. In some situations, you’ll be providing a number of arguments to support your message (e.g., a school essay, a business proposal). To maximize the appeal of your message, you need to properly sequence those arguments. Remember the primacy effect from the second chapter? It explained how information presented earlier in a sequence can influence how people perceive the rest of the information in that sequence. Similarly, there’s another powerful effect called the recency effect, which causes people to remember the final pieces of information in a sequence more easily than other pieces of information in that same sequence (Murdock, 1962). Let’s examine how you can use the primacy and recency effect to properly sequence arguments and enhance the strength of your message.*  

- Page 146 (location ~ 2233-2240)    

*Position Strong Arguments First and Last. Whether you’re writing a school essay, crafting a business proposal, or simply listing the reasons why your target should comply with your request, you should position your most compelling arguments first and last in your sequence. Those arguments will carry more weight in those positions due to the primacy and recency effect. This advice also applies in situations where your performance will be judged against other people (e.g., talent show, job interview). You can enhance your perceived performance and become more memorable by choosing the first or last position in the line-up. Those positions are also favorable because they take advantage of conceptual fluency: when the judges are choosing the winner at the end, the first and last positions will come to their mind more easily, making the judges prone to misattributing that ease of remembering to a superior performance. If they can easily remember your performance, they will mistakenly jump to the conclusion that your performance was better than the others.*  

- Page 147 (location ~ 2240-2248)    

*Are the first and last positions equal, or is one position more powerful than the other? If you’re a dedicated persuasion-ist and you want to take this sequencing strategy a step further, you should put your most compelling argument last when your target must decide immediately. Why? Because that argument will be in your target’s working memory when he makes the looming decision (Miller & Campbell, 1959). On the other hand, if your target will be waiting before deciding, then you should put your most compelling argument first because the primacy effect is more powerful in the long run.*  

- Page 147 (location ~ 2253-2257)    

*Position Weak Arguments in the Middle. Remember how it can be beneficial to include a small amount of negative information in your message? If you follow that advice, you should position that negative information in the middle of your sequence of arguments. Not only will that position still lead to the benefit of giving your message a more comprehensive appearance, but that negative information will then be more likely to fly under your target’s radar. You should never position negative information or weak arguments first because of a potentially harmful principle known as the inoculation effect (McGuire, 1964). When a doctor gives you a shot (i.e., an inoculation), you typically receive a small dosage of the infection or disease so that your body can build an immunity to protect against it. The same concept applies to persuasion. If we’re first exposed to a weak argument, we resist that weak argument and develop greater resistance toward future arguments, even if those future arguments are stronger. Once we successfully resist an initial attempt at persuasion, we develop persuasion “antibodies” that help us resist future attacks more easily. You should always strive to make a good first impression because, once an impression has been formed, it becomes increasingly more difficult to change it.*  

- Page 148 (location ~ 2260-2271)    

*People’s perception of a communicator can be a powerful heuristic that they use to immediately accept or reject a particular message. This section will explain two powerful aspects of that heuristic: perceived authority and attractiveness. Authority. If somebody told you to give an extremely powerful electric shock to an innocent bystander, would you do it? What if the person instructing you was wearing a lab coat? Would that make a difference? In one of the most groundbreaking and controversial experiments in the history of psychology, Stanley Milgram found that it makes a tremendous difference (Milgram, 1963). In that experiment, two participants entered a room and waited for an experimenter. One person was a genuine participant, and unbeknownst to him, the other participant was a confederate hired by the experimenter. After the two “participants” greeted each other, the experimenter entered the room and explained that the experiment was examining learning. He told participants that each of them would be randomly assigned to one of two roles: one participant would be given the role of “teacher,” and the other participant would be given the role of “learner.” The supposed randomness was actually fixed; the confederate was always the learner, and the true participant was always the teacher.*  

- Page 149 (location ~ 2278-2289)    

*The results of the study were “shocking.” A staggering 65 percent of people administered the highest level of voltage (which participants were informed was near lethal). Even when they heard severe screams of pain, the majority of people still gave a powerful electric shock that could have killed another person. This experiment has been conducted across the globe, and although the percentages vary depending on the culture, the results are generally consistent: humans are psychologically compelled to obey authority figures to a very large and frightening extent. Even ordinary and moral citizens will perform unthinkable acts if instructed by a higher authority.*  

- Page 151 (location ~ 2303-2308)    

*Attractiveness. In a perfect world, attractiveness shouldn’t affect your persuasion. But wait—we’re not living in a perfect world. Does attractiveness matter? Yes it does. Unfortunately, it matters to a scary extent. Take a look at some disturbing findings: Attractive criminals receive more lenient sentences (Sigall & Ostrove, 1975). Attractive infants receive more attention and caretaking (Glocker et al., 2009). Attractive men receive higher starting salaries, and attractive women earn more money later in their career (Frieze, Olson, & Russell, 1991). Despite those positive benefits, are attractive people inherently “better” than other people? Many researchers have examined that question, but most have failed to produce evidence to support that claim. One of the only reliable traits where attractive people have a genuine advantage over other people is mating success (Rhodes et al., 2005). All of the other benefits from physical attractiveness have emerged through psychological factors. Attractive people have a significant advantage because other people unknowingly act more favorably toward them. For example, when male students in one study were led to believe that they were speaking with an attractive female over the phone, not only did they develop a more favorable impression of the female’s personality, but the women on the other line, in turn, developed a favorable impression of the male’s personality (Snyder, Decker Tanke, & Berscheid, 1977). Despite all of those alarming claims about attractiveness, there are techniques that you can use to enhance your perceived attractiveness. Two techniques that were discussed earlier include familiarity and similarity (Moreland & Beach, 1992; Montoya, Horton, & Kirchner, 2008). You can enhance your perceived attractiveness by: (1) being in the general vicinity of someone more often and, (2) revealing any type of similarity that you might share with that person.*  

- Page 152 (location ~ 2318-2336)    

*Their Perception of Your Message. Heuristics can be found not only in the source of a message (e.g., a communicator’s authority and attractiveness) but also in the message itself. This section will describe three peripheral cues in your message that can appeal to people who are using heuristic processing. Amount of Information. Consistent with the lazy nature of heuristic processing, we can easily be influenced by the sheer amount of supporting information that a message contains. Generally, people using heuristic processing will be more persuaded if you include more information in your message because they blindly assume that your message contains more support (Petty & Cacioppo, 1984).*  

- Page 153 (location ~ 2339-2344)    

*Aesthetics. Whether it occurs consciously or nonconsciously, people evaluate information based on the aesthetics of a message. Even important financial decisions, such as a financial analyst evaluating a company’s annual reports, can be influenced by the design and graphics within those financial reports (Townsend & Shu, 2010). A promising new field—called neuroaesthetics—studies brain responses toward aesthetically pleasing stimuli (Chatterjee, 2010). One of the main findings from this field is that people experience a biological sense of pleasure when they view aesthetically pleasing material. For example, when researchers measured people’s neural responses when they viewed an assortment of paintings, they found that the orbitofrontal cortex (an area of our brain associated with rewards) became activated only for paintings that those people previously rated to be beautiful (Kawabata & Zeki, 2004). Whenever we view aesthetically pleasing stimuli, our brain experiences a rewarding sensation, and we often misattribute that pleasurable feeling to the underlying content of that message. Therefore, you should always spend time enhancing the aesthetics of a message, even if it seems irrelevant.*  

- Page 154 (location ~ 2352-2362)    

*Justification. Would you mind reading this section while underlining it with your finger? Because that will help demonstrate the psychological principle in this section (I’ll explain why in a few paragraphs). Imagine that you’re at a library. You’re in a rush to use the copier, but you’re waiting for someone to finish using it. Which of the following three requests do you think would help you the most? Excuse me, I have 5 pages. May I use the copier? Excuse me, I have 5 pages. May I use the copier, because I need to make some copies? Excuse me, I have 5 pages. May I use the copier, because I am in a rush? Did you guess the third reason? Technically, you’d be right. In the classic study that examined this scenario, 94 percent complied with the third request, whereas only 60 percent complied with the first request (Langer, Blank, & Chanowitz, 1978). But what about the second request? When you think about it, that request is virtually the same as the first request. If you need to use a copier, then obviously you need to make some copies; adding “because I have to make some copies” shouldn’t make a difference. What’s fascinating, though, is that the second request yielded 93 percent compliance, a nearly identical rate of compliance as the third request. When people provide a reason for their request, people who are using heuristic processing will generally assume that the reason is valid. Therefore, giving any reason—even a meaningless reason such as “because I have to make some copies”—can enhance your persuasion because it becomes a heuristic that your target uses to decide whether he will comply.*  

- Page 155 (location ~ 2368-2384)    

*How powerful is reinforcement? One night, Skinner set the reward mechanism in several Skinner boxes to give pigeons a reward at predetermined time intervals. Even though the rewards were only based on time (i.e., not the pigeons’ behavior), the pigeons nevertheless attributed those rewards to whichever behavior they were exuding immediately before those rewards. As Skinner described, their misattribution led to some peculiar behavior: One bird was conditioned to turn counter-clockwise about the cage, making two or three turns between reinforcements. Another repeatedly thrust its head into one of the upper corners of the cage. A third developed a “tossing” response, as if placing its head beneath an invisible bar and lifting it repeatedly. Two birds developed a pendulum motion of the head and body, in which the head was extended forward and swung from right to left with a sharp movement followed by a somewhat slower return. (Skinner, 1948)*  

- Page 160 (location ~ 2447-2454)    

*First, offering any type of incentive will boost your persuasion, right? Wrong. Mounting research has disconfirmed the common dogma that all incentives lead to better performance. The main reason for that surprising discrepancy can be found in two types of motivation that result from different incentives: Intrinsic motivation—Motivation that emerges from a genuine personal desire (i.e., people perform a task because they find it interesting or enjoyable) Extrinsic motivation—Motivation that emerges for external reasons (i.e., people perform a task to receive a corresponding reward)*  

- Page 162 (location ~ 2472-2477)    

*Size of Incentive. Common sense dictates that large incentives are more effective than small incentives. Intuitively, it makes sense; but that’s not necessarily the case. Extensive research shows that small incentives can be more effective than large incentives in certain situations. Perhaps the most direct reason why large incentives can be ineffective is that they sometimes increase anxiety levels. When people in one study were given incentives to perform tasks that measured creativity, memory, and motor skills, their performance sharply decreased when the incentive was very large because it caused them to “choke under pressure” (Ariely et al., 2009).*  

- Page 162 (location ~ 2479-2485)    

*Does that mean that all large incentives are bad? Not at all. When incentives aren’t so large as to increase anxiety levels, they can elicit higher levels of motivation and compliance. Uri Gneezy and Aldo Rustichini (2000a) conducted an experiment that attracted considerable attention from academia because of their surprising finding. They gathered a group of high school students to travel from house to house collecting donations, and they offered the students one of three different incentives: Large incentive (10 percent of the total money that they collected) Small incentive (1 percent of the total money that they collected) No incentive (just the same good ol’ heartfelt speech about the importance of the donations) Among those three incentives, which do you think elicited the most motivation from the students (in terms of the amount of money collected)? Believe it or not, the students who received no incentive collected the most money (an average of NIS 239 collected). Students who received the large incentive were a close second (an average of NIS 219 collected), followed by the students who received the small incentive (a pathetic average of NIS 154). This surprising finding led the researchers to conclude that you should either “pay enough or don’t pay at all.”*  

- Page 163 (location ~ 2485-2497)    

*So what’s the takeaway? How big should your incentive be? When you want to persuade people to comply with a one-time act, then a large incentive might be your best bet (but not too large of an incentive that will cause them to “choke”). However, when you’re trying to persuade people to develop a long-term change in their attitude or behavior, a large incentive will backfire because it will spark extrinsic motivation. They might comply with your request, but they will be less likely to develop a genuinely favorable attitude toward the task. In order to create the greatest change in your target’s attitude, you need “insufficient justification”—your incentive must be small or nonexistent so that your target attributes his compliance toward a genuine desire to comply, not toward a desire to receive the external reward.*  

- Page 165 (location ~ 2519-2525)    

*Monetary Incentives. Albeit effective at driving extrinsic motivation, monetary incentives are very poor at eliciting intrinsic motivation. Part of the reason for this failure stems from the negative connotation that we place on monetary incentives: Depending on their nature, incentives can shift a situation from a social to a monetary frame . . . You meet an attractive person, and in due time you tell that person, “I like you very much and would like to have sex with you.” Alternatively, consider the same situation, but now you say, “I like you very much and would like to have sex with you, and, to sweeten the deal, I’m also willing to pay you $20!” Only a certain kind of economist would expect your partner to be happier in the second scenario. (Gneezy, Meier, & Rey-Biel, 2011, p. 11)*  

- Page 165 (location ~ 2528-2535)    

*In order to maintain healthy social relationships, you should refrain from giving your friends cash, and instead, offer them a gift if you want to thank or reward them. As Dan Ariely describes, “while gifts are financially inefficient, they are an important social lubricant [because] they help us make friends and create long-term relationships . . . Sometimes, it turns out, a waste of money can be worth a lot” (Ariely, 2009). The same outcome can occur when you use a monetary fine to discourage behavior. When researchers implemented a small fine for parents who were late to pick up their child from daycare, the amount of tardiness actually increased (Gneezy & Rustichini, 2000b). When they removed the fine, tardiness returned to zero. Why? That small fine transformed the social duty for parents to pick up their children on time into a market price. It essentially removed the guilt that parents would feel if they picked up their child late because it became a price that parents could pay for being tardy.*  

- Page 166 (location ~ 2544-2552)    

*Social Incentives. In terms of intrinsic motivation, social rewards (e.g., gifts, praise, positive feedback) can be more powerful than monetary incentives because they avoid the negative connotation associated with money. Although offering $20 for sex would be highly frowned upon, “offering $20 worth of flowers might indeed make the desired partner happier” (Gneezy, Meier, & Rey-Biel, 2011). Social incentives are powerful because they’re more subtle than monetary incentives. Remember in the Big Bang Theory where Sheldon conditioned Penny’s behavior by offering her a chocolate each time that she performed a desirable behavior? If the reward had been money, Sheldon’s devious motive would have become crystal clear; chocolates helped to disguise his underlying motive.*  

- Page 167 (location ~ 2552-2559)    

*Perception of Incentives. The size and form of your incentive are important factors, but there’s a third and more important factor: your target’s perception of your incentive. Sometimes, the mere presence of an incentive can communicate negative information. For example, offering people an incentive could lead them to perceive that you distrust their competence in completing a task or that you’re trying to control their behavior. In these situations, those incentives can lead to worse performance (Falk & Kosfeld, 2006). In fact, those two examples—a perceived lack of competence and a perceived lack of autonomy—are the two most commonly cited perceptions that determine whether your incentive will elicit intrinsic or extrinsic motivation (Deci & Ryan, 1980). This section will explain those two perceptions in more detail and how you can overcome them.*  

- Page 168 (location ~ 2565-2572)    

*Competence. How can you offer incentives that won’t make it seem like you distrust your target’s competence? Perhaps the best solution lies in the “contingency” of your incentive. Generally, there are two main types of incentives: Engagement-contingent: an incentive that is given for engaging in an activity (e.g., parents rewarding their child if she studies for an exam) Performance-contingent: an incentive that is given only if some standard of performance is met (e.g., parents rewarding their child if she earns a high score on an exam) According to researchers, engagement-contingent rewards result in worse performance because they devalue your target’s competence, whereas performance-contingent rewards result in higher performance because they promote competence (Houlfort et al., 2002).*  

- Page 168 (location ~ 2572-2580)    

*Autonomy. If your target perceives your incentive as an attempt to control her behavior, then she’s more likely to develop extrinsic motivation (if any motivation at all). Even simple phrasing, such as the word “should” (e.g., “you should do _____ for _____”), can trigger feelings of control and worsen performance (Ryan, 1982). In addition to avoiding the word “should,” how else can you provide an incentive without infringing on your target’s autonomy? One powerful and clever idea is to let your target choose an incentive from a list of potential options. For example, whereas most businesses simply provide their salespeople with a predetermined monetary commission rate, it might be more favorable to let their salespeople choose the type of commission that they want (e.g., monetary commission, vacations days, gift certificates). Allowing people to choose their commission or incentive, in any situation, can lead to three powerful benefits: First, rather than trying to guess which incentive will spark the greatest motivation in your target, allowing your target to choose among multiple incentives will lead to an incentive that is more appealing to your target (e.g., some salespeople might prefer a monetary commission, whereas others might prefer vacation days). Second, allowing your targets to choose will satisfy their need for autonomy, an outcome that will spark more intrinsic motivation and, as a result, higher job satisfaction and performance levels. Third, their choice becomes a type of behavior that reinforces a congruent attitude that they genuinely want the incentive. Not working hard enough to achieve that incentive would be inconsistent with their new attitude, and so they will be motivated to work harder so that they can achieve it (e.g., when salespeople choose vacation days as their commission, they reinforce the idea that vacation days are important to them, and they will be motivated to work harder to achieve that incentive). Don’t brush over this advice. This particular strategy involving choice is greatly overlooked by both academia and industry professionals, which is mind-boggling given the persuasive psychological mechanisms at play.*  

- Page 169 (location ~ 2581-2599)    

*Psychological Reactance. To understand the answer behind the pizza phenomenon, it’ll help if you recognize how it’s similar to the first illustration in this chapter where I asked you to immediately skip to the next chapter. In both illustrations, one of your freedoms was limited. In the opening example, I limited your freedom to read this chapter; in the second example, I limited your freedom to eat pizza. Do you see the common outcome? Whenever a freedom becomes limited, we react. Literally. It’s called psychological reactance (Brehm, 1966). When we perceive a particular freedom becoming restricted, we feel a natural tendency to maintain or recapture that freedom. Have you ever wondered why some teenagers, after being told by their parents that they can’t date a specific person, want to date that person even more? When teenagers perceive their parents to be controlling their behavior, they’re more likely to engage in psychological reactance by touting the infamous, “You can’t control me! I can make my own decisions!” Indeed, reactance can explain why teenagers constantly battle their controlling parents and why warning labels on violent television programs actually increase viewership (Bushman & Stack, 1996).*  

- Page 173 (location ~ 2645-2655)    

*To demonstrate, place yourself in the shoes of participants in a clever experiment (Chartrand, Dalton, & Fitzsimons, 2007). Think of people in your life that you perceive to be very controlling. Now, among that list of controlling people, choose one person who typically wants you to work hard and one person who typically wants you to have fun. Researchers in that experiment subtly extracted that information from students so that they could examine how they would perform on an intellectual task after being subliminally exposed to those names. Remarkably, even though participants weren’t able to consciously notice the names of those controlling people, they still engaged in psychological reactance. People performed significantly worse on the intellectual task when they were primed with the name that they associated with working hard, whereas people performed significantly better when they were primed with the name that they associated with having fun. Psychological reactance is so strong that it occurs automatically and outside of our conscious awareness.*  

- Page 174 (location ~ 2656-2664)    

*Since those two sets of programs were exactly the same, why did the results flip when people were presented with the set second of options? The answer: the pressure to avoid a loss overpowers the pressure to achieve a gain (Tversky & Kahneman, 1991). We all feel an instinctive urge to avoid losses, including the loss of an opportunity. When there’s only one slice of pizza remaining, we feel an increased pressure to seize that last slice before we lose the opportunity. Instead of viewing the slice of pizza through a lens of freedom (such as through psychological reactance), loss aversion views that pizza scenario in terms of a possible lost opportunity, a similar idea but a distinction nonetheless.*  

- Page 175 (location ~ 2680-2686)    

*Commodity theory is so robust that it applies to other contexts besides food. In addition to the commonly cited “drunk goggles” reason, commodity theory can explain why men in bars tend to find women more attractive as the night progresses (Madey et al., 1996). At the beginning of the night, the opportunity to score a date is promising, but as the night wears on, that opportunity gradually shrinks. As the end of the night gets even closer, that opportunity becomes even more limited, which causes men to find the remaining women more attractive.*  

- Page 176 (location ~ 2692-2696)    

*PERSUASION STRATEGY: MOTIVATE THROUGH LIMITATIONS To summarize the chapter so far, there are three ways in which limitations influence perception and behavior: When we perceive a freedom becoming limited, we feel an urge to engage in psychological reactance to reclaim that freedom (e.g., when our freedom to eat pizza becomes limited, we feel a stronger desire to reclaim that freedom by eating pizza). We are psychologically wired to avoid loss; when an opportunity is becoming limited, we feel a pressure to seize that opportunity to avoid losing it (e.g., when our opportunity to eat pizza is diminishing, we feel compelled to seize that last slice). When we perceive something to be limited, scarce, or unavailable, we place higher value on the item in question (e.g., a slice of pizza becomes more valuable when it is the only slice left). Albeit similar, psychological reactance, loss aversion, and commodity theory can explain why limitations are so powerful. Now that you understand these principles, the next section will explain how you can use them to drive more momentum from your target. Limit Their Options. The previous chapter described how allowing your target to choose an incentive can help spark intrinsic motivation because it promotes their freedom. Although the previous chapter described choice as a good thing, choice can become a detriment when there are too many options from which to choose. Popularized by Barry Schwartz (2004), this paradox of choice can lead to two negative outcomes: (1) people are less satisfied with their decision, or (2) people avoid deciding altogether.*  

- Page 176 (location ~ 2696-2712)    

*Outcome 1: Lower Satisfaction with Decision. There are two main reasons why offering too many options can cause people to feel less satisfied with their final decision. First, when you increase the number of options, you also increase people’s expectations for the quality of the final option. When the number of options surpasses a certain point, people’s heightened expectations may become an extreme anchor point that triggers a contrast effect and causes the final option to seem below average (Diehl & Lamberton, 2008). The second reason stems from loss aversion.*  

- Page 178 (location ~ 2725-2731)    

*Recall how the loss of $1 million drove you crazy, whereas the loss of $10 was forgotten immediately. That underlying concept applies here. Your loss seems more severe when more options are present because you seem to lose more potential benefits. If you choose Option A in the first set of mutual fund options, you only lose the benefits from Option B and C, but if you choose Option A in the second set, you lose the benefits that are offered in all of the 9 remaining options. Though you chose the same option in each set, the loss of additional benefits seems more severe in the second set, which causes you to be less satisfied with your decision.*  

- Page 179 (location ~ 2742-2746)    

*Outcome 2: Decision Paralysis. There are two main reasons why presenting more options can cause people to avoid making a decision altogether. The first reason is simply an extension of loss aversion: when facing a vast number of options, people recognize the potential loss that will result upon choosing only one option, and so they avoid that potential loss by postponing their decision. The second reason is known as information overload. When you present more options to people, you place more cognitive strain on your target to investigate each option to make an informed decision, which can be very demotivating, especially when the decision is complex or important. Did your employer ever present you with an extensive list of possible 401(k) plans? If so, you might have felt overwhelmed, and if you postponed your decision, you’re not alone. Research shows that participation rates in 401(k) plans decrease in direct accordance with the number of plan options; the more options that are available, the lower the participation rate (Iyengar, Jiang, & Huberman, 2004).*  

- Page 180 (location ~ 2755-2764)    

*Prevent Their Procrastination. Albeit powerful, decision paralysis can be avoided. This section will teach you two limitations that you can implement to force your target to make a decision sooner rather than later. Limit Time. The first technique is to limit the amount of time available to comply with your request, which can easily be accomplished by setting a deadline. Question: Which day of the week is the least effective at gaining compliance? Answer: Tomorrow. There’s something magical about tomorrow; it just never seems to come. No matter how many days go by, tomorrow forever remains at the same distance in the future. It’s quite magical. Setting a deadline is so powerful because it puts an end to that black magic by finally bringing “tomorrow” closer to the present. Even if the deadline is irrelevant or pulled from thin air, this time pressure can prevent procrastination.*  

- Page 183 (location ~ 2796-2804)    

*Deadlines are also very powerful because they limit a potential opportunity; once the deadline passes, your target gives up that opportunity. Sure, washing dishes may not be perceived as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, but there are many other situations where a deadline can make your message seem much more desirable (e.g., marketers setting deadlines for product coupons and discounts).*  

- Page 184 (location ~ 2808-2811)    

*Limit Availability. You’re walking down the aisle of a liquor store looking for some white wine, and you reach the shelves that are displaying the wine. There are two brands left—both of which are the same price—but since you know nothing about wine, you’re clueless about which brand is better. What would you do in this scenario? Research on shelf-based scarcity suggests that you would likely choose the brand of wine with fewer bottles on the shelf (Parker & Lehmann, 2011). If something is less available, people are more likely to spring to action for two reasons: (1) they need to act fast before they lose the opportunity (loss aversion), and (2) if the item is scarce, people assume that it must be popular (commodity theory and an indirect influence of social pressure). You might think that this concept only applies to selling products, but there are many other applications. This principle can even help you when you’re applying for a job. Job applicants who indicate that they are considering other job opportunities (i.e., applicants who seem less available) are evaluated more favorably than candidates who don’t indicate whether they’re considering other job opportunities (Williams et al., 1993). Consistent with commodity theory, interviewers consciously or nonconsciously use availability as a heuristic to judge the quality of an applicant; if applicants are less available because they are considering other job offers, then they must be a better quality applicant.*  

- Page 184 (location ~ 2812-2823)    

*Having performed as a stage magician for many years, I can confidently say that one of the most fundamental principles of stage magic is misdirection: controlling the audience’s attention to avoid seeing the “magic” occurring behind the scenes. Despite that basic definition, performers interpret misdirection differently. Amateurs claim that misdirection is directing the audience’s attention away from the secret (e.g., sleight of hand), whereas professionals claim that misdirection is directing the audience’s attention toward something else. Aren’t those interpretations the same? That’s what I thought for many years until I started recognizing the importance of limitations. Notice that amateurs try to limit the audience’s attention toward the place where they shouldn’t be looking, whereas professionals try to direct the audience’s attention toward something else. As you learned in this chapter, whenever a freedom becomes limited, we feel a natural urge to resist that limitation. Thus, amateurs who try to limit the audience’s attention are unintentionally creating more attention in that area.*  

- Page 185 (location ~ 2825-2835)    

*If you can’t tell by looking at the image, the three products (from left to right) are oatmeal, mayonnaise, and coffee. Do you have your rating? You may not have consciously realized it, but the mayonnaise in the middle likely affected your rating of the outer products (i.e., the oatmeal and the coffee). Why? Research shows that mayonnaise can spark feelings of “disgust,” which can then be transferred to other products that are in contact with that item, an effect known as product contagion. In a series of experiments examining product contagion, Morales and Fitzsimons (2007) presented people with a small shopping cart containing a few items, and they positioned some “feminine napkins” so that they were resting slightly on a box of cookies in that shopping cart. Even though everything was still packaged and unopened, the researchers discovered that this slight contact made people significantly less likely to want to try those cookies. When they presented a different group of people with those same items but with six inches of space between those products, that negative perception virtually disappeared. The researchers also found that product contagion occurs when the target item is non-consumable (e.g., notebooks) and that the effect becomes stronger when the packaging of the disgusting item is clear or transparent. The main point I’m trying to illustrate with that study is that certain features from one stimulus can easily transfer to another stimulus, an implication that stems far beyond proper shelving in supermarkets. This chapter will explain a similar psychological principle and how you can transfer favorable qualities to your message via some type of association with another stimulus.*  

- Page 189 (location ~ 2895-2908)    

*Like any rational researcher, Pavlov assumed that the dogs didn’t posses some type of telepathic power but were instead being influenced by some scientific principle. And his hunch was right. After developing the belief that the dogs were somehow being conditioned to expect the arrival of the meat, Pavlov conducted a series of experiments to test his prediction. He first examined whether his dogs would respond to a neutral stimulus, such as the ringing of a bell. When no particular response occurred, he started pairing the bell with the presentation of the meat powder; immediately before presenting the dogs with meat powder, he would repeatedly ring the bell. Before long, the dogs started associating the bell with the meat, and they would start to salivate upon Pavlov merely ringing the bell. Thus, he found: Bell --> No Salivation Bell + Meat --> Salivation Bell --> Salivation Pavlov concluded that a neutral stimulus that elicits no behavioral response (e.g., a bell) can start to elicit a response if it becomes paired with an “unconditioned stimulus,” a stimulus that does elicit a natural response (e.g., meat that elicits salivation). Albeit a simple finding, that idea of classical conditioning launched a new era in psychology. Why does it work? The most common explanation is that if a neutral stimulus (e.g., bell) is repeatedly presented before an unconditioned stimulus (e.g., meat), then the neutral stimulus becomes a signal that the unconditioned stimulus is arriving (Baeyens et al., 1992). When Pavlov repeatedly rang the bell before presenting the meat, the dogs became conditioned to expect the arrival of the meat, and so they began salivating with a mere ring of the bell. But that’s not the only explanation. Far from it, in fact. Although the neutral stimulus is typically presented before the unconditioned stimulus, research shows that conditioning can occur even if the unconditioned stimulus (the response-provoking stimulus) is presented before the neutral stimulus, a form of classical conditioning known as backward conditioning or affective priming (Krosnick et al., 1992). If you present an unconditioned stimulus that elicits some type of affective/emotional state, you are essentially priming people to view a subsequent neutral stimulus through the lens of their new emotional mindset (hence the term “affective priming”). Accordingly, those emotional feelings can influence people’s perception and evaluation of that neutral stimulus.*  

- Page 190 (location ~ 2913-2937)    

*Suppose that you consistently phone your friend when the weather is beautiful. In this situation, you would be using affective priming to associate yourself with beautiful weather: You --> No Response You + Beautiful Weather --> Positive Response You --> Positive Response With enough pairings, your target would begin to associate the positive feelings that naturally occur from the beautiful weather with you. In other words, you become the bell from Pavlov’s experiment, except instead of producing salivation, you’ll produce a positive emotion when your target sees you. Besides affective priming, there are other reasons why your target would come to associate you with the positive emotions produced from beautiful weather. The rest of this section will describe two additional explanations.*  

- Page 192 (location ~ 2937-2946)    

*Misattribution. One of the main ideas that you should take away from this book is that we tend to make misattributions. Take processing fluency as an example. That principle can explain why stocks with easy-to-pronounce ticker symbols (e.g., KAR) significantly outperform stocks with ticker symbols that are difficult to pronounce (e.g., RDO) (Alter & Oppenheimer, 2006). People mistakenly attribute the ease with which they process a ticker symbol with the strength of a company’s financials; if a ticker symbol is easy to pronounce, the positive feelings that emerge from that quick processing get misattributed to the underlying financials of that company.*  

- Page 193 (location ~ 2946-2951)    

*Remember the example where you (the neutral stimulus) associated yourself with good weather (the unconditioned stimulus)? Like some readers, you might have quickly brushed over that tidbit because it seemed far-fetched (let’s face it, it does seem far-fetched). But research suggests that this claim may have some merit. Schwarz and Clore (1983) telephoned people on either a sunny or rainy day to assess their well-being, and remarkably, people were significantly happier and more satisfied with their life when the weather was sunny. But what’s interesting is that the misattribution error disappeared for many people when the researchers began the conversation by asking, “How’s the weather down there?” When people in the rainy condition were asked that innocent question, they consciously or nonconsciously realized that their dampened mood was due to the weather, and they adjusted their happiness ratings upward. Here’s the main takeaway: associations are powerful because we can easily misattribute characteristics and responses from one stimulus as emerging from another stimulus (and if you’re thinking about calling up an old friend, it might not be a bad idea to wait until the weather is nice). The next section will explain one final reason behind the power of associations: our semantic network.*  

- Page 193 (location ~ 2955-2965)    

*Classical conditioning is effective because it essentially forms a new connection in that network. When you consistently pair yourself with good weather, for example, you form a new connection between “Good Weather” and “You” in your target’s semantic network (the more pairings, the stronger the connection becomes). Once that connection has been formed, activation can then spread from “You” to “Good Weather” to “Positive Emotions.” When you classically condition yourself with good weather, you can activate positive emotions because of the spreading activation in your target’s semantic network. Well, look at that! We did come full circle in the METHODS process. The first chapter explained how our semantic network is our mental framework of the world, and this chapter explained how associations are the building blocks of our semantic network. The profound implications of our semantic network stem beyond the scope of this book, but hopefully you now have a greater appreciation for the nature of associations and how they guide our perception of the world.*  

- Page 196 (location ~ 2992-3000)    

*Leverage Metaphors. You might not realize it, but metaphors are all around us. In fact, some researchers argue that our understanding of the world has largely emerged through seven “deep metaphors” (Zaltman & Zaltman, 2008). It makes sense if you think about it. If we continuously learn new things by associating those ideas with existing concepts in our semantic network, there had to have been a starting point. In a sense, everything that we come to learn will somehow be tied to the deepest elements of our semantic network, elements that probably relate to primary aspects of survival, such as eating food. And when you stop to reflect on the use of our language, you do start to notice an enormous number of those metaphors (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). Don’t’ believe me? Well, I hope that you can at least swallow your pride and stomach this meaty paragraph while I demonstrate. Don’t worry, I won’t ask you to regurgitate this information for an exam; it’s purely food for thought. And if this half-baked idea doesn’t convince you, then just let it digest and simmer for a while; it might start to eat away at you. But once you realize the raw abundance of these food metaphors, it might seem like a bittersweet epiphany. Or if this idea still smells fishy and it’s not an idea that you can sink your teeth into, then I hope you can still devour the remaining contents in this book (and I hope it doesn’t leave a sour taste in your mouth). As long as you don’t view this book as just another flavor of the month, then I’ll be happy, or as I like to say, I’ll experience the sweet smell of victory.*  

- Page 197 (location ~ 3007-3027)    

*Leverage the “Good = Up” Metaphor. In addition to food, another fundamental metaphor relates to spatial orientations. Vertical positions, in particular, have come to signify the “goodness” of objects. In their cleverly titled article, “Why the Sunny Side Is Up,” Brian Meier and Michael Robinson (2004) describe that metaphor: Objects that are up or high are often considered to be good, whereas objects that are down or low are often considered to be bad. In the Bible, for example, the righteous go “up” to Heaven, whereas sinners go “down” to Hell. In the media, movie critics give good movies “thumbs up” and bad movies “thumbs down.”. . . People who smoke marijuana “get high,” but when the euphoria diminishes, they “come down,” and happy people feel “up” whereas sad people feel “down.” (Meier & Robinson, 2004, p. 243)*  

- Page 198 (location ~ 3031-3038)    

*Communicate Using Metaphors. Given our reliance on metaphors to understand new concepts, why not use metaphors to communicate information? As explained, we come to understand new concepts by relating them to concepts that already exist in our semantic network. Therefore, you can convey your message more effectively by comparing it to an already existing concept in your target’s semantic network. That notion becomes especially important for abstract ideas and concepts. Experienced marketers consistently convey intangible benefits about their product (e.g., high quality) by comparing it to something tangible because that metaphor helps to “tangiblize” it. For example, Gerald and Lindsay Zaltman (2008) describe how “life insurance companies use ideas associated with various symbols such as umbrellas (Travelers), rocks (Prudential Insurance Company), and hands (Allstate) to convey qualities of protection, sturdiness, and support.” Not only can metaphors help you communicate information more effectively, but they can also enhance the recipient’s trust in you. In research that I conducted with a few professors from my good ol’ alma mater, we found that if you communicate information by comparing it to something with which a recipient is already familiar, you increase affective trust, a type of trust where the recipient has a strong “gut reaction” to trust you (Kolenda, McGinnis, & Glibkowski, 2012). The takeaway: whenever you need to communicate a new concept to people, you should compare it to something with which they’re already familiar.*  

- Page 199 (location ~ 3048-3060)    

*A more effective strategy can be seen in the E*Trade commercials with the talking babies. Not only does that association subtly imply a positive message about E*Trade (e.g., the service is so easy to use that a baby can use it), but it’s also a naturally occurring prime (I’d be willing to bet that you run into babies more frequently than you run into tigers and toucans). In fact, the next time that you see a baby, you might start a conversation with the parents by asking if they’ve seen “that commercial with the talking baby,” which would help spark word-of-mouth for E*Trade. But perhaps an even better strategy beyond mere trade characters can be found in attaching your message to a naturally occurring need state, such as hunger or thirst. Suppose that an advertiser created a food commercial by using a talking baby. The commercial could take advantage of the common phrase, “food baby” (an expression that refers to someone who just ate a lot of food and looks bloated). The first scene could depict someone feeling hungry, the second scene could show an inside view of that person’s stomach and how it’s completely empty, and the third scene could show a talking baby on vacation (implying that the person is hungry and doesn’t have a “food baby” inside her stomach). It’s a pretty absurd example, but it incorporates several psychological principles.*  

- Page 202 (location ~ 3083-3093)    

*How can you take advantage of this principle to enhance your perceived attractiveness? Fortunately, there are plenty of situations where people experience a naturally higher state of arousal besides a wobbly bridge and a broken dentist’s chair. If you’re hoping to meet a potential romantic partner, one option is to join a gym, a place where nearly everyone is in a natural state of arousal. When you interact with fellow gym goers, they’re more likely to interpret their state of arousal as attractive feelings toward you, and thus you stand a better chance of sparking a romance with gym members (White, Fishbein, & Rutsein, 1981). Similarly, if you begin dating someone, you could choose dates that take advantage of naturally occurring arousal, such as a scary movie or an amusement park. Scary movies have been found to increase the affiliation between couples (Cohen, Waugh, & Place, 1989), and roller coasters at amusement parks lead people to rate their seat partner as more attractive (Meston & Frohlich, 2003).*  

- Page 204 (location ~ 3128-3135)  
