---
title: The Autobiography of Gucci Mane (Gucci Mane;Neil Martinez-Belkin)
author: E
date: '2017-10-15'
summaryOn: true
summary: 'Hola, this is el summary'
categories: []
tags:
  - books
  - review
showDate: no
draft: yes
---


*James Sr. married Olivia Freeman on September 20, 1941. They had eleven children, the sixth of whom was my father, Ralph Everett Dudley, born August 23, 1955. Throughout the course of his life my father went by a lot of aliases. Slim Daddy. Ralph Witherspoon. Ricardo Love. For the purposes of this story, a nickname he received as a young boy matters most: Gucci Mane. That’s right. He’s the OG. See, James Sr. had always fancied himself a dresser. He loved him some nice clothes and expensive leather shoes. He’d spent time in Italy during his years in the service, which is where he fell in love with the Gucci brand. Originally he’d given the nickname Gucci to one of his nephews, an older cousin of my father’s whom my father used to follow around all the time. Annoyed by his younger cousin always begging to hang and telling him “Come on, man,” he started calling my father the “Gucci Man.” As for how “man” became “Mane,” well, I’m pretty sure that’s just some country, Alabama twang. I’ve got an uncle on my momma’s side they call Big Mane.*  

- Page 10 (location ~ 145-153)    

*Like my brother, I was naturally athletic, but I never had his drive and ambition when it came to sports. It didn’t interest me. I never wanted no letterman jacket. I envisioned myself as the guy at school with a nice car. The guy who dressed the best. The one with a bankroll in his pocket. As far back as I can remember, I really just wanted to get me some money. • The move to East Atlanta had instilled in me a deep financial fear. It seemed like every month my momma was saying we were behind on the rent, or we didn’t have money to pay the light bill. I’d eavesdrop on her calls and hear her telling my aunties in Bessemer that shit just wasn’t going right for us. I was seeing people in the neighborhood get evicted—something you didn’t see in Alabama—and I became convinced that would be our fate. That I was still going to school in Ellenwood only made me feel poorer. The kids at Cedar Grove were by no means rich, but they came from working-class families and their houses were definitely nicer than our Mountain Park apartment or the Knights Inn motel. I grew up thinking my father had money, but once we got up with him in Georgia I realized that wasn’t the case, at least not anymore. I discovered that back in the day, my father sold heroin and coke, but by the time he entered my life in Atlanta he was a full-fledged con artist. Every penny he made came by way of tricking somebody else out of theirs.*  

- Page 22 (location ~ 335-346)    

*His other vice was the sauce. My father got drunk every day. Morning, noon, night. Before he’d even leave the house he’d put down a pint of cheap gin. He’d chase it with a sip of water, swish it around in his mouth, and spit into the sink. I remember the sound. The bottles would get thrown away but he would keep the caps. He used those for the pea game. Then he’d head out, taking the MARTA bus downtown to find people to con. He’d be drunk as hell by the time he got home at night, reeking of alcohol. All of that was a reality check. I learned young that if I ain’t got shit, then I just ain’t got shit. If I wanted something in life, I would have to find a way to get it myself. Constantly worrying about money the way that I did messed me up. I would tell myself when I got grown I’d never live with those feelings. Twenty-five years and millions of dollars later I still remember that anxiety. My first enterprise was picking up aluminum cans in the neighborhood and taking them down to the store for a few cents each. That’s how I met my friend OJ, who would become the rapper OJ da Juiceman. OJ was a few years younger than me and he lived in Mountain Park too. Together we’d canvass the hood for cans. Sometimes we’d save time by stealing bags of cans that had already been collected by the older guys in the neighborhood. We’d hop their fences, grab the bags from the yard, and take off running. But the real way I started to make money was selling drugs. I was in the seventh grade. At the time Duke was rolling with some of the hustlers in the neighborhood. These were the niggas driving fixed-up cars, who had the sickest gear, and were known for carrying weapons. I never had no positive male role models growing up so to me, these were the coolest guys I knew. My brother would never go full-on in the streets like me, but back then he was selling a little bit of weed.*  

- Page 25 (location ~ 370-384)    

*The top of Sun Valley was a prime trap, but at first I found it hard to compete with the older hustlers who operated there. The only reason I managed to was that I lived where I did. I would wait for those guys to retire for the night, seizing my opportunity to get my sacks off. OJ moved from Mountain Park to Sun Valley around the same time I did. OJ and I had been buddies since the days of picking up cans, but because he was three years younger than me we’d mostly ran with different crews since then. Despite our difference in age OJ had been out on the corner hustling as long as I’d been. And he was good at it. OJ was a small guy, but he was never afraid to fight when shit went down. I always respected that.*  

- Page 34 (location ~ 518-523)    

*The Texaco is a place of trade, a spot where people can go to the store to buy a beer and some Swishers, then get some dope on their way out. A lot of folks preferred to go up there to shop—especially those who weren’t completely fucked-up Js. Functioning crackheads, if such a thing ever did exist. I’m talking about people with jobs and families, but they still smoked crack. They’d rather come to the Texaco than have their kids and neighbors see them buy dope in the apartments.*  

- Page 35 (location ~ 526-529)    

*I graduated from McNair in the spring of 1998 with a 3.0 GPA and a HOPE scholarship to Georgia Perimeter College. But I was doing pretty well for myself in the streets, so going back to school was the last thing on my mind. So I didn’t go. I think they call that a gap year. After I sat out the first two semesters, my momma gave me three options: go to school, get a job, or move out of her house. Since school was never difficult for me, enrolling at Georgia Perimeter seemed like the easiest option to keep her off my back. I was an outsider at Georgia Perimeter. Whenever I did show up it was for the sole purpose of showing out. I had me a box Chevy with rims at the time and I’d pull up and hang out in the parking lot and try to talk to the coeds. I’d see my old classmates from McNair and how they were going through the whole college transition, trying to get their lives together. And there I was, pulling up in a nice car, with jewelry on my neck and dope-man Nike Air Maxes on my feet. I was flashy as hell. I liked shining on people. I was above it all. That was pretty much the extent of my college experience. I don’t have stories of frat parties or tailgating or whatever it is they do there. I was enrolled in some computer programming classes but I could count on both hands the number of times I showed up to class. When I first enrolled I worked the school out of like eighteen hundred dollars for textbooks. I took every dollar of that money and put it towards getting myself a bigger bomb. That’s how serious I was about my studies.*  

- Page 38 (location ~ 578-589)    

*When I went in front of the judge a few months later, I took a plea deal as part of Georgia’s First Offenders Act. If I accepted the plea and completed a probation period, I could have this first felony struck from my record. But if I got caught “in any trouble” again, the deal was off the table, and the judge could resentence me. “I’m giving you ninety days in county jail, Mr. Davis,” he told me. “But do you understand that if I see you here again, I can sentence you up to thirty years in prison behind this?” I heard him loud and clear, but I couldn’t drop hustling cold turkey. I’d had nearly forty thousand dollars saved up at the time of my arrest, but I now had lawyer fees and had gotten my own apartment after my momma kicked me out the house. I needed to be making money. Since I was still technically enrolled at Georgia Perimeter, my lawyer was able to convince the judge to suspend my ninety-day sentence until after the following school year, which was about to start up. So just like that I was out and it wasn’t long before I was back to dibbling and dabbling in Sun Valley and the Texaco. It might sound like the judge’s warnings went in one ear and out the other, but that wasn’t the case. I’d absorbed what he told me. Those words carried weight. I was back in the streets, yes, but for the first time in my life I was thinking about what I could do to get myself out of this shit. My decision to pursue music was heavily influenced by my arrest at the Texaco.*  

- Page 40 (location ~ 606-617)    

*What was appealing to me was being the money man behind a rapper. I’d been heavy into Master P throughout high school. P was the consummate rap entrepreneur. No Limit was putting out albums every other day back then and I bought all of them just off the strength of P’s cosign. I would have never bought a Fiend or Mac or Mia X album, but I listened to all of the No Limit albums to hear what P was saying. Even before Master P, I always gravitated toward the CEO, the person in charge. As a little boy in Alabama, I liked Eazy-E more than Ice Cube. I thought Tony Draper was cooler than 8Ball or MJG. I wanted to be more like J. Prince than Scarface. Later on when Cash Money started blowing up, I knew right away that Baby and Mannie Fresh were my favorites. The Big Tymers fucked me up for real. I liked the shit they were talking about. I had a friend whose younger brother decided he wanted to rap. He was fourteen and his moniker was Lil’ Buddy. I saw potential in this kid and thought he could become a Kris Kross or Lil’ Bow Wow type. And I could be the money man pulling the strings. I decided to give it a shot.*  

- Page 41 (location ~ 626-634)    

*Zay and I could not have been more different. This was a guy who went to church every Sunday. He didn’t drink, smoke, or curse. He had nothing to do with the type of things I had going in the streets. He came from a religious military family and his folks had kept him on the straight and narrow. Despite our differences on paper, we clicked off the dribble. I was feeling his beats and I ended up buying a batch of ’em from him for a thousand dollars. With beats in hand I was ready to get to work with Lil’ Buddy. But before I could do that, I had to report to DeKalb County to serve out my ninety-day sentence.*  

- Page 43 (location ~ 646-650)    

*I linked back up with Zay after my stint in the county. He suggested I start rapping and put the music mogul stuff on hold. Zay had seen me rap because I’d been writing the lyrics for Lil’ Buddy and then telling him how to deliver them, giving him the flows. Zay thought I had talent. I wasn’t so sure. Not only did I have the stigma that rappers were all broke and lame, but I had long ago convinced myself that people would never take me seriously if I started up rapping. It wasn’t that I’d never rapped before. Far from it. Even before my brother put me onto his music, I had an interest in poetry and the process of putting words together in creative ways. I can’t remember what I wrote but there was a day in first grade the teacher had our class make cards for Mother’s Day. Everyone else’s was on some “Roses are red, violets are blue . . .” shit, but I deliberated over that card until I could come up with something that didn’t just rhyme but captured how I felt about my momma. It caught my teacher by surprise. “Wow, Radric,” she said. “This is how you really feel.” I colored the card and brought it home, excited to give it to my momma over the weekend. I sure as hell wasn’t thinking about a rap career, but I did know this was something I was good at. Better than my peers.*  

- Page 43 (location ~ 660-670)    

*I’d always been a big fan of Memphis rappers. Guys like 8Ball and MJG, Kingpin Skinny Pimp, Tommy Wright III, Playa Fly, and Triple Six Mafia. But Pat was my favorite. Still is. He was talking that street shit and I just knew he was telling the truth. I knew that life, and I could tell if a rapper was playing Scarface. I had an ear for that. I knew Project Pat did the shit he was rapping about. Can’t nobody tell me different. I knew C-Murder did what he said. I knew Soulja Slim did what he said. I knew BG did what he said. Their music was real and it motivated me. My music had to be the same way. P and Baby were my idols, but I couldn’t be rapping about Bentleys and Ferraris because I wasn’t living that life. The cars I was around were Regals and Cutlass Supremes. I couldn’t be rapping about shutting down the clubs because I wasn’t in the clubs. I was in the trap house. I was on the corner. I wanted my music to inspire niggas to get money and come up out of that shit, but at the same time I wanted to let them know I was one of them. I couldn’t leave them out.*  

- Page 45 (location ~ 682-690)    

*Soon I found myself at Zay’s nearly every day. There wasn’t a plan. We were just two young men trying to find ourselves, in music and in life. We didn’t know the fun we were having would give birth to a whole genre and inspire a generation of artists after us. Trap music. To some it’s the subject matter. Stories of serving fiends through burglar bars. To others it’s a style of beatmaking. Shit, today there’s a whole audience of white kids who think trap music is about popping molly and going to a rave. In a way it’s all those things. But when I think about trap music I think about those early days in Zay’s basement. When I would go over early in the morning after a night spent juugin’ in my neighborhood. When Zay would mix our songs and he didn’t even know how to mix. The whole process was crude and unrefined. What we were making wasn’t radio-ready and definitely not destined for the charts. When I think about trap I think about something raw. Something that hasn’t been diluted. Something with no polish on it. Music that sounds as grimy as the world that it came out of.*  

- Page 45 (location ~ 690-698)    

*My next move would be a pivotal one, one of the smartest decisions I made in my early music career. I brought the last of my CDs, posters, and postcards to the bootleggers on the Westside of Atlanta by the Oakland City train station. I explained I was an up-and-coming artist out of the Eastside and that I was trying to get exposure for my music outside of my neighborhood. “I need you guys to sell the hell out of this CD,” I told them. “Whatever money that you get from it, it’s yours.” “You sure?” they asked. I assured them I was. To sweeten the deal, they printed me a few thousand duplicate copies of Gucci Mane LaFlare and posters for free, which I sold for two or three dollars a pop—all profit. More important, though, my music was now being pushed all throughout the state of Georgia.*  

- Page 47 (location ~ 710-717)    

*It wasn’t long before I was doing the same shit. Finessing people out of their money came naturally. It was in my genes. I knew whom I could short and whom I had to give extra to. I knew whom I could give some bullshit to and tell them it was good. I could sense if someone was weak or scared. I could feel it and use it to my advantage. I worked every move I could. Hit a lick for ’bout 50 stacks Niggaz trippin’ talkin’ ’bout Gucci bring the money back I rapped that line in a song called “Lawnmower Man.” It’s a line that got me notoriety in my hood. Because it was true. Niggas couldn’t believe I had the balls to talk about that incident on a track and it fortified my reputation as a rapper and a robber. I started breaking into houses too. Not looking for TVs or jewelry or anything like that. I was after money and drugs exclusively. I’d target those whom I’d previously shopped with, and after gaining their trust I’d hide out and wait for them to leave their stash house before breaking in. If I couldn’t find it, I’d just sit in the house and wait for their return. Then I’d make them give it up. I quickly adopted the attitude of my new crew. I accumulated enemies fast. My prey was my own hood. Even my closest friends from Sun Valley started distancing themselves after I aligned myself with the Zone 6 Clique, and those were not some soft niggas. They were superstreet too but they didn’t condone robbing and tricking people out of their work. I’d bring my new crew around and they’d be looking at my buddies from Sun Valley like they were a steak. I kept them off them but that was only because I was targeting them for myself. At one point I even ended up taking BP’s stash, and he was one of my best friends. That only alienated me from those guys even more. I’d become a slimy dude. My appetite had become insatiable. In keeping up with my new partners I expanded my hustle*  

- Page 48 (location ~ 731-747)    

*It wasn’t long before I was doing the same shit. Finessing people out of their money came naturally. It was in my genes. I knew whom I could short and whom I had to give extra to. I knew whom I could give some bullshit to and tell them it was good. I could sense if someone was weak or scared. I could feel it and use it to my advantage. I worked every move I could. Hit a lick for ’bout 50 stacks Niggaz trippin’ talkin’ ’bout Gucci bring the money back I rapped that line in a song called “Lawnmower Man.” It’s a line that got me notoriety in my hood. Because it was true. Niggas couldn’t believe I had the balls to talk about that incident on a track and it fortified my reputation as a rapper and a robber. I started breaking into houses too. Not looking for TVs or jewelry or anything like that. I was after money and drugs exclusively. I’d target those whom I’d previously shopped with, and after gaining their trust I’d hide out and wait for them to leave their stash house before breaking in. If I couldn’t find it, I’d just sit in the house and wait for their return. Then I’d make them give it up. I quickly adopted the attitude of my new crew. I accumulated enemies fast. My prey was my own hood. Even my closest friends from Sun Valley started distancing themselves after I aligned myself with the Zone 6 Clique, and those were not some soft niggas. They were superstreet too but they didn’t condone robbing and tricking people out of their work. I’d bring my new crew around and they’d be looking at my buddies from Sun Valley like they were a steak. I kept them off them but that was only because I was targeting them for myself. At one point I even ended up taking BP’s stash, and he was one of my best friends. That only alienated me from those guys even more. I’d become a slimy dude. My appetite had become insatiable.*  

- Page 48 (location ~ 731-746)    

*Hours later I awoke to the smell of smoke. The roof of the small shotgun house was in flames. Someone had thrown a firebomb. Our presence wasn’t appreciated. I ran outside to find Red holding a hose, trying to extinguish the fire. But the hose couldn’t reach the roof. I ran inside to grab the stash while Suge scrambled together our munition. We ran outside to load up the truck, knowing we had to split. Red kept at it with the hose. For a minute it seemed he was actually going to put it out, but once it spread to the insulation it was over with. We heard sirens and it was time to go. We took off, passing the fire trucks, and headed back to Suge’s side of town, where we got a room at a motel to hide out and debrief. Red wanted to return to Atlanta immediately and he had the right idea. This was a tiny community. Word traveled fast; people were going to hear about this. But I told him to head back solo because I didn’t want to hang Suge and his buddy out to dry. After all, none of this would’ve happened if it wasn’t for us showing up, and if I’d gotten my cousin into some sort of trouble, I needed to be there to get him out of it. I stayed in Alabama for a few more days to see how everything played out. In the meantime I worked the remainder of the pack out of the motel. At some point I left to get something to eat. When I got back the stash was gone. I immediately suspected foul play. My instincts told me it was an inside job and that one of the housekeepers had robbed me. I called Suge and he showed up and got into it with the motel staff, demanding to see the security tapes. The motel called the law. Before I knew it the police were on the scene and Suge was in handcuffs. I made a run for it, hopping into Suge’s car, fleeing for safety. Damn. I’d gotten my cousin arrested and his buddy’s house burned down. And my family heard all about it. Even my brother was turned off by the trouble I was bringing around. He told my cousins they shouldn’t mess with me anymore. It hurt to see my family turn their backs on me but not enough to change anything. I was relentless. I had a girl in Birmingham and I started to operate out of her spot. She stayed in the middle of the projects and was popular there, so she set me up with many of my customers. One of them was her best friend, Amy. Amy sold weed, and whenever I’d come into town I’d serve her a QP (quarter pound). Amy had a boyfriend named Bunny. And Bunny was the first person to introduce me to lean.*  

- Page 51 (location ~ 773-791)    

*For the uninitiated, lean is a drink made from mixing prescription cough syrup and soda. It was made popular in the nineties by DJ Screw, the Houston DJ who created Chopped and Screwed music. It’s best known for being made with Sprite, but you can use anything for the soda. Mountain Dew. Kool-Aid. Crush. Some people add Jolly Ranchers or Skittles. Whatever. The part that matters is the pharmaceutical ingredient. Codeine and promethazine. That’s the shit that puts you in another zone. Bunny was a hustler too, and for a nigga from the sticks he moved a lot of weight. He didn’t sell weed, which was why I would serve Amy, but he had them bricks. The four of us would hang when I was in town, on some double-date shit. Bunny didn’t smoke but he did drink lean. And one night he offered me some. “Gucci, I got some grit if you want it.” That’s what they call it in Alabama. Grit. They don’t call it lean. They call it grit because it’s thick like grits and they drink it straight, like a shot. They don’t put it in soda like how they do in Houston.*  

- Page 52 (location ~ 792-800)    

*The lean had messed me up, but it wasn’t until a few days later that I fully felt the effects of the drug. Out of nowhere, it seemed, I was totally out of my mind. It was like I couldn’t control my thoughts. I found myself doing irrational shit I would never do normally, like giving people stupid deals on dope. I was thrown off, but I didn’t yet make the connection to the lean. Maybe I’ve been smoking too much. Maybe someone put something in my drink at the Waffle House and tried to poison me. I was still tripping when I got back to Atlanta a few days later and my symptoms had gotten worse than selling people dope on the cheap. My behavior was fucked up. I wasn’t talking right. My pupils had gone dark. I’d become extremely paranoid and had turned aggressive toward everyone I came across. Word got around the hood that something was up with me. When I came across my brother in the streets, he knew right away something was seriously wrong. Duke grabbed me by the arm and we took a long walk home to my momma’s. There was something strange about that walk. It was dreamlike. It brought me back to when my brother and I used to walk to school together. When we were living in East Atlanta but still going to school by Ellenwood, at Cedar Grove. After we got off the bus we would have to walk almost two miles to get to school every day, rain, sleet, or snow.*  

- Page 53 (location ~ 807-818)    

*Years later, when things were completely out of control and it was obvious what I was doing to myself, a doctor told me I had to cut it out with the lean. “Listen, you cannot drink this stuff anymore. It’s causing a chemical imbalance in your body,” he explained. “This drug is just not for you.” By that point I was drinking it first thing in the morning and last thing at night to fall asleep. My stomach had ballooned to the size of a watermelon. I looked pregnant. Even then I wasn’t ready to hear that. I couldn’t accept that this drug had become my kryptonite. After that first incident I refrained from drinking lean for a while. It wasn’t that I was worried I would trip out again. It just hadn’t been a feeling I particularly enjoyed, being glued to my seat at the Waffle House. Lean wasn’t even something widely available in Atlanta then. It was a Houston thing. It wasn’t until I met Doo Dirty that I started to get hooked. Doo Dirty was Red’s homeboy from Savannah, and he was the big man down there. Savannah has a totally different culture from Atlanta. People in Savannah talk different, they dress different. The way folks move there mirrors Florida more than it does Atlanta, being that it’s only two hours away from Jacksonville and not far from Miami. It’s a port city, so a lot of drugs from overseas come through. And drugs were Doo Dirty’s specialty. He kept a lot of ’em around. Doo Dirty put me onto pouring lean in a soda can, which I found to be a much different experience. It tasted good and I didn’t react like when I drank it straight. I’d drank an ounce straight down the hatch that first night with Bunny, but now I was pouring an ounce or two in a two-liter of soda and sharing it among a crew.*  

- Page 54 (location ~ 824-838)    

*Juve had taken a liking to my boys, so I was the only one asked to leave, which I did without any hoopla or words exchanged. While it may have seemed like I’d just gotten punked out I wasn’t embarrassed in the least. I was proud of how I’d handled the situation. I’d told Whoa I was getting Str8 Drop a Juvenile verse and he’d put his money down for that. So I wasn’t coming back to him with a beat and a hook. For me this was a business arrangement and I had to stand firm on what we’d agreed on. I was waiting outside the bus for my buddies when Wacko and Young Buck, two well-known artists who were running with Juvenile at the time, hopped off the bus to smoke a blunt. “Man, don’t even worry about that shit back there,” Wacko told me, passing me the blunt. “Juve be on his bullshit sometimes.” Doo Dirty got off the bus a couple of minutes later and tried to get me to patch things up. I didn’t think there was anything to patch up. I had no problem with Juvenile. I’d just meant what I said. I wasn’t interested in paying that much money for a Juvenile beat. I didn’t even know the nigga made beats. “Here’s what we’ll do,” D told me. “Let the wire transfer go through, we’ll get the beat and the hook, and when we get home I’ll give you the money for it.” I knew if anyone was good for seventy-five hundred it was D, so I agreed and let them proceed with the song. After all I didn’t have an issue with a Juvenile beat and hook if I wasn’t the one paying for it. Wacko and Buck respected how I’d handled myself in there and invited me back on the bus, now that we were moving forward with the record. But I just waited outside until they finished. “I don’t need to get back on the bus,” I told them. “Let’s just do the song.” That song with Juvenile never ended up amounting to anything, but it was my first experience interacting with a major artist. Years later I saw Juvenile and we both pretended like it was our first time meeting. We swapped songs over at Patchwerk Studios in Atlanta. Everything went smoothly. I respected Juvenile. But I knew as soon as I saw him that he remembered that day. I didn’t say anything about it because I didn’t see a reason to bring up a negative experience that was in the past. But I could just tell he remembered.*  

- Page 58 (location ~ 880-898)    

*Jacob was the son of Dwight York, also known as Malachi York, the founder of the infamous Nuwaubian Nation, a cult religious group that built a compound in Putnam County, Georgia. I’d heard of Malachi, who had recently pleaded guilty to 116 counts of child molestation, but I wasn’t familiar with Jacob, who was telling me that he had been in the music industry for a long time. He said he had been instrumental in brokering the careers of the Notorious B.I.G., Lil’ Kim, Cam’ron, Pastor Troy, and a bunch of other artists from the South. His reputation had earned him his nickname “the Chancellor.” Most of this turned out to be true but at first I found it all hard to believe. Jacob backed up his talk when he flew me to New York City to meet with the majors. He had us up at the W Hotel on Lexington Avenue and 49th Street. As soon as we checked in he told me he wanted me to meet Cam’ron, who was about to pull up to the hotel.*  

- Page 69 (location ~ 1050-1056)    

*As all this was going on Def Jam decided they wanted “So Icy” for Jeezy’s upcoming debut album. Jeezy was the shit at the time. He’d followed up The Streets Iz Watchin’ mixtape with Trap or Die, a release that was the soundtrack of the city. He was ridin’ with BMF, and they were running the show in Atlanta. He had a solo deal with Def Jam and then a group deal with Boyz N Da Hood under Puff Daddy’s Bad Boy Records. But even with all that hype and industry backing, Jeezy didn’t have a breakout song. “So Icy” was the first time a Jeezy song had gone into radio rotation. Jeezy had “Over Here” and don’t get me wrong, that was definitely killing the clubs, but the radio wasn’t playing him. That wasn’t even out of the ordinary. That’s how records break out of Atlanta, from the strip clubs up. Having my second single played across the country—that was out of the ordinary.*  

- Page 72 (location ~ 1094-1100)    

*To his credit Jacob was able to convince Jeezy we should still shoot a video for “So Icy” and do a remix. It was no reconciliation but it would benefit both of us. The plan was to pull Boo off the song, then Jeezy and I would record new verses for the remix. Jeezy did his and then stepped out to go to the bathroom or something. As I was recording mine Jeezy barged back into the studio. “What the fuck?!” he shouted. “You got niggas out here trying to press me?!” I exited the studio and found Black Magik, another rapper signed to Big Cat. Weapons had been drawn. I wasn’t sure if Magik had tried to rob Jeezy or chump him, but some sort of altercation had just taken place. Jeezy was fuming and understandably so, and he was thinking I’d set him up. But I had no idea what was going on. So I was pissed too. What the fuck was Magik doing coming up to my session, pulling shit that was going to fuck up my money? I was here working and now Magik was coming in and causing problems. I got Magik to leave and Jeezy seemed to understand that I hadn’t been involved. Still, he was furious. What could have been a final opportunity for us to find common ground became an opportunity for further conflict. From there everything went downhill quick. I was working on finishing my album, but it seemed like half the city was beginning to turn on me. When Jeezy decided it was “Fuck Gucci,” a lot of dick riders seemed to fall in line out of fear of going against him and the crew he was running with. They were dominating Atlanta’s nightlife, so DJs started cutting off “So Icy” before my verse. My reputation in the city went from rising star to one-hit wonder.*  

- Page 73 (location ~ 1114-1127)    

*Jeezy showed up to Charlie Brown Field for the video shoot but neither of us had anything left to say. He’d been trying to blackball me in the city and it worked. But I knew I’d just made a great album and soon that would get me back in the fanfare. I just wanted to get this video shoot over with and be done with the guy. I was over this shit. But it wasn’t over. At some point Black Magik took it upon himself to put out a whole bunch of songs dissing Jeezy, trying to use the Gucci-Jeezy beef to get himself some notoriety. Things were already bad, but when Magik put that shit on wax it added fuel to the fire. It also made everything public. There were no more whispers. Everything was out in the open and Jeezy was now in a spot where he really had no choice but to respond. But when he did, he didn’t come at Magik. He came at me. I was on the road headed out of town for a pair of shows in Florida when I heard “Stay Strapped” on the radio. Jeezy talked a lot of shit on there, but it was something he said at the end that really got my attention. Something about how he had ten grand for whoever brought him my “So Icy” chain. I remember at first I was just pissed that he was calling my chain some bullshit. I’d paid forty thousand dollars for that piece. Now folks were going to see me rocking it and might think it was fake. But then it hit me. If it was open season on my chain, it was open season on me. There was another bounty on my head.*  

- Page 75 (location ~ 1139-1150)    

*I haven’t exactly tested out every jail in the country, but I can tell you there ain’t too many places like Fulton County. That place has got to be one of the most fucked-up correctional facilities in the United States. Fulton County Jail was not like DeKalb County, where I’d just spent a week before making bond on my murder charge and done my sixty-seven days back in 2002. DeKalb was heavily policed, with a bunch of old, white, racist good ol’ boy COs running the show. They love fucking with niggas in there. Fulton County is the city jail, policed by young black COs, many of whom came up in the same areas as the inmates. It is very easy to get a job there. Fulton County is not a place people aspire to work. It was extremely overcrowded. Built in the eighties, the facility was designed to hold 1,332 inmates. When I got to Rice Street in ’05, there were about three thousand of us in there. Cells meant to hold two bunks had three. Even that wasn’t enough. There were mattresses strewn across the dayroom floor.*  

- Page 87 (location ~ 1324-1332)    

*incisors went through his jaw on both sides of his mouth. When they took him to Grady Hospital he*  

- Page 91 (location ~ 1390-1390)    

*incisors went through his jaw on both sides of his mouth. When they took him to Grady Hospital*  

- Page 91 (location ~ 1390-1390)    

*“Can you tell me why y’all still got me in here?” I shouted. She stopped, turned around, and approached my cell. “Well, you stabbed your visitation buddy in the face,” she responded. “I did what?” I still don’t even understand how this shit happened but apparently I hit this guy so hard that his incisors went through his jaw on both sides of his mouth. When they took him to Grady Hospital he told them the reason he had these holes in his jaw was that I’d stabbed him in the face with a pen. I explained to the warden that I hadn’t stabbed anyone and she agreed to go back and check the surveillance footage. She returned the next day. “Well, you’re right,” she told me. “We looked back at the footage and you didn’t stab him. But let me ask you something else. Why were you still hitting him after he was unconscious?” I didn’t have an answer for that one but I wouldn’t need one. After spending more than three months in solitary I was allowed to return to general protective custody. I had a disheveled Afro and a beard like T. J. Duckett. I was a mess. The hole had broke me down. It seemed like there was little progress being made on my cases so I fired my attorney. Jacob was telling me that he had taken an aggressive approach with the DA, which had brought things to a standstill. So I hired a new team of lawyers from the law firm that had represented Baltimore Ravens linebacker Ray Lewis when he’d gotten charged with murder after an incident at a Super Bowl party in Atlanta in 2000. That case was a whole lot more complicated than mine, so I was hoping they’d be able to figure my shit out.*  

- Page 91 (location ~ 1386-1400)    

*The thing was the DA’s office had a bunch of high-profile cases and investigations going on at the time, and because they saw loose connections to mine they didn’t want to drop my charges publicly yet. But off the record, we were told, I’d beaten the murder. This was months before that news became public. It was relief more than it was happiness. A weight had been lifted off my shoulders, one that I’d forgotten I was carrying because it’d been there so long. In October I pleaded no contest to my aggravated assault case. I was given a six-month sentence with six and a half years’ probation. I’d already spent three months in Fulton County, so by the top of 2006, I was home.*  

- Page 92 (location ~ 1406-1411)    

*For one, Mother Dearest and I had not been on good terms for a while. We’d had a rocky relationship ever since she kicked me out of the house in ’01. But that’s not even what was fucking me up. I just couldn’t believe she was actually here, at my trap. My momma didn’t do shit like that. She wouldn’t be caught dead in a place like that. This house had been shot up days earlier. Junkies were coming in and out as the hours passed. Standing next to my momma was Deb Antney. She’d been on a mission to get in touch with me ever since the failed “Go Head” video shoot. Somehow she found my mother, who had caught wind of what I was up to. “What are you doing here?!” I asked them. I was in shock. “We want to talk to you,” Deb explained. “You’re throwing your life away. You have a real chance to make it. Why would you be back here doing this?” At first I couldn’t get past the fact that my momma was actually standing outside. But after they left, Deb’s words took root. I’d just gotten out of jail. Maybe I shouldn’t be doing this. At the very least I should get back to working on my music too. But I wasn’t going back to Big Cat.*  

- Page 96 (location ~ 1466-1475)    

*D4L was a rap crew out of the Bowen Homes projects in Bankhead, a neighborhood on the Westside of Atlanta. Zone 1. They were the pioneers of snap music and at the top of 2006 snap music had taken over the country. “White Tee,” the Dem Franchize Boyz song that inspired “Black Tee,” had been the beginning of snap, but D4L had brought it to the masses. Their song “Laffy Taffy” hit Number 1 on the Billboard charts the month I came home from prison. But I wasn’t familiar with Shawty Lo. I’d been locked up during D4L’s rise and Lo wasn’t even on “Laffy Taffy” or “Betcha Can’t Do It Like Me,” their other big song. Lo wasn’t on most of the songs on their album. This guy was what I’d originally set out to be: a hustler turned financier who hopped on a track every now and then. Like me, Lo had just come home from a year in prison. He was a real street nigga and we hit it off. Lo had his own studio in Bankhead, and as our friendship developed he told me I could record there for free. Since I was no longer recording at Big Cat’s studio and now had to foot the bill myself for studio time, I took him up on his offer. I started going there a lot. He had a whole roster of in-house producers who hooked me up with beats too. That meant something to me. Lo didn’t need anything from me. He extended his hand, asking for nothing in return. He had character, he was a genuine person. Ever since then we were close friends. I was there for Lo for anything. A cameo in a video, a feature, whatever it was. I could never charge him a dollar.*  

- Page 97 (location ~ 1478-1490)    

*I hit up Burn One and met him at Zay’s, where I was knocking out a verse for some niggas I’d met at a club called Blue Flame. It was four in the morning by the time Burn One showed up, but I’d taken two X pills and was wide awake. I was geekin’ that night. With some convincing, Zay let us all in his basement. Middle-of-the-night surprise sessions were not his thing, but these guys were going to pay him for a beat, so he obliged. Zay played a few cuts and after these dudes found one that was to their liking, I laid down my verse. Then it was time for the other guy to do his. This nigga rapped the worst shit I’d ever heard in my life. It was terrible. And when he walked out I told him so. “That sucked,” I told him straight up. “I can’t be next to you on that. Burn One, you want my verse? You can have it.” Burn One didn’t say a word. He could see these guys were pissed. “What are you talking about?” the other one asked. “We just paid you five thousand dollars for that verse.” “Nah, the five thousand was for Zay’s beat,” I told them. “I can’t give you my verse.” I switched the script. As lame as these dudes were with music, they weren’t soft. I’d seen guns in their car. Even as things got tense I wouldn’t budge. I was all over the place. Zaytoven saw where this was going, so he decided to cut his losses and wipe his hands of the situation. We were told to leave.*  

- Page 98 (location ~ 1497-1509)    

*This was early in my career, but to this day I haven’t really seen someone putting on the way Scotty was in that house. The guy was living like Scarface. Inside he had some friends over when I came in with my girl. We sparked up a blunt and got to talking. Then he introduced me to his buddies. “This is the guy I was telling you about!” he said excitedly. “The guy who everybody don’t like. You know, the one with the murder charge!” My jaw almost hit the floor. This was not the way I wanted to be introduced. I gave Scotty a look, hoping he’d realize his mistake and change the subject, but it kept going. He and his crew of yes men having their own conversation about my life while I was standing right there in front of them. What the fuck? I looked over at my girl and she looked equally taken aback, which let me know I wasn’t tripping over nothing. That was my cue to get out of there. “Hey, homes,” I interrupted. “I appreciate you having me over for dinner, but I’m out of here.” “What? What do you mean?” he said. “What’s going on?” He had no idea what he’d done to offend me. I later learned that there was a good chance Scotty was high as hell on the powder. I read somewhere he blew like thirty million dollars in six months on a cocaine bender for the history books. He ended up losing that mansion. Of course I didn’t know that then. I just thought the guy was lame.*  

- Page 103 (location ~ 1565-1577)    

*This album had the songs “My Kitchen,” “Vette Pass By,” and “Colors.” Songs that today are considered my classics. But in 2007 Asylum didn’t like them. They said they sounded like mixtape tracks, that they wouldn’t make an impact beyond 285. They liked the album with all the other producers and the big-name features and commercial vibes. I didn’t agree but I was trusting the people overseeing this album. These were the folks who’d promised this release would make me a superstar. So I ended up going with the first one. Those songs I’d made during that two-day trip to New York would be the nucleus of Back to the Trap House. The album wasn’t due to come out for a few months, but I didn’t have to wait until then to enjoy my success. With “Freaky Gurl” climbing the charts, I was feeling more and more like the star I wanted to be. I’d gotten the Hummer. I’d spent seventy-five thousand dollars on an iced-out Bart Simpson chain. When someone from The Simpsons complained and we had to blur out Bart in the “Freaky Gurl” videos due to creative licensing issues, I went out and got an Odie chain. But man, folks were really going crazy for that Bart chain. Every city I’d hit the club, promoters would ask me if I could wear it when I hit the stage.*  

- Page 106 (location ~ 1620-1629)    

*The label planned on following the “Freaky Gurl” remix with “I Know Why,” featuring Pimp C, Rich Boy, and Blaze1—the song Polow and I had been working on when he said Waka was going to be a star. But two weeks before the album came out Pimp C died. Something about a sleep apnea disorder, compounded by drinking lean. My own habits with the stuff had gotten bad. Over the years there had been times when I’d gone too hard with the X pills, but that had always felt recreational. With the lean I’d developed a dependence. It became something I needed. My life was moving fast and this drink helped me slow everything down. I was now on the road nearly every weekend, which meant long bus rides of smoking weed and sipping lean to pass the time. I just wasn’t as outward with my usage as a lot of other rappers were with the Styrofoam cups because I was still on probation. In the beginning lean had been something special, a vice I enjoyed. An indulgence. Now it was something I required to operate. My fame was at an all-time high and these pints helped me calm down and relax in situations where I would otherwise feel anxious, like a big performance or a radio interview where I knew I’d get asked about some shit I didn’t want to talk about.*  

- Page 108 (location ~ 1649-1659)    

*A lot of rappers need to hear beats for inspiration, but I never showed up to the studio with nothing to say. If anything I had the opposite problem. I was overflowing with ideas, which was why I was rapping on these unfinished skeleton beats, to get one batch of ideas out of my system and be able to move on to the next. Sitting still in the studio killed me. I couldn’t do it. I always had something to get off my chest. I was always thinking about how I could phrase things in a way that would connect with folks. The producers could finish up the beats on their own time. You have no idea how many songs I made—big, well-known ones—that were nothing but a kick and a snare in my headphones when I recorded them. My work ethic would pay off. With each mixtape I dropped, the disappointment surrounding Back to the Trap House faded away. I was getting hotter and hotter. My mixtape run of 2008 would culminate with The Movie, with DJ Drama. Doing a Gangsta Grillz mixtape was always on my bucket list. But because of my issues with certain artists over the years I hadn’t pursued it. I had a lot of respect for Drama and I didn’t want to put him in a tough spot. Still, I always knew that we could put together something amazing. Drama knew it too. He saw what was happening with my career. When the feds raided his studio in 2007 and he ended up in county jail for a night, niggas in there were telling him Gucci was the truth. Now every city he went to, people wanted to hear my music and he wasn’t going to be the one to stop them. And he had fallen out with Jeezy. So when Drama reached out about doing a tape I didn’t need to give it much thought. I’d been waiting on that call for years.*  

- Page 114 (location ~ 1738-1751)    

*The last time I was in Fulton County—before and after I got sent to the hole—I’d been placed in a segregated part of the jail because of my status as a known rapper. But it was full of snitches and people with high-profile cases, as mine was. My placement there was at the request of my attorneys, who were convinced someone trying to make a name for themselves would target me. And they were right; I’d been targeted. Regardless of whether it was a smart precaution, being in there was a problem. It did not sit well with me that I was this gangster rapper talking about hitting licks and moving bricks in my music, but then I was hiding with rats when I got locked up. I wanted to be treated like everyone else. So when I returned to Fulton County in the fall of 2008, I signed a waiver to be in general population. There were daily fights, stabbings, and even a shooting during that stint. But as vicious as that place was, I never had any issues there after the incisor incident in ’05. For the most part I found that people respected me. Those who didn’t knew better than to test me. It would not have been a good idea. I was already fuming over getting locked up on some bullshit. If anyone tried to approach or handle me in any type of way, it would not have been a move that would end in their favor. If anything, niggas were doing their best to stay out of my way. I spent my time smoking weed, writing raps, and keeping in touch with the outside world on a cell phone I’d managed to get, minding my business until I could go home. But outside the walls of Fulton County, there was shady shit going on.*  

- Page 117 (location ~ 1781-1793)    

*A couple of minutes later Jeezy and Coach came back. Jeezy asked if he and I could talk. I agreed. We took a walk and then something strange happened—the tension wasn’t there. There wasn’t even a bad vibe between us. “I wanted to chop it up,” he told me. “Those young boys you’re running with are causing trouble out here.” Here was the situation. Waka and his best friend, Slim Dunkin, had been getting into it with niggas in Jeezy’s crew. This would all become public a year later when Waka and Jeezy’s boy Slick Pulla got to fighting at Walters Clothing and Dunk knocked out some other CTE guy at a flea market, but all of that had been brewing for a while. None of this had anything to do with me. This was Waka and Dunk being young and crazy. “I think we should get the young boys to chill,” Jeezy suggested. “Ain’t nobody gonna get hurt but one of them.” He had a point. I was in rehab and Jeezy wasn’t in the streets anymore. If anyone was going to get hurt, it was going to be one of them and I didn’t want anything happening to Waka or Dunk. “You’re right,” I told him. “I can talk to them.” I realized in that moment that Jeezy knew he had blood on his hands from everything that had happened. Now he was trying to prevent another bad situation from happening. I couldn’t argue with that. I agreed with it. Jeezy didn’t know this but I’d just made “My Worst Enemy.” On that track I more or less said I was ready to move on from all my beefs. So it was a crazy coincidence that we were sitting here looking to do what I’d written about in that unreleased song. We met again the next day. We sat down, agreed to a truce, and said we’d put our history behind us. We even agreed to work on music. Jeezy had just done a song with Zay called “Trap or Die 2.” That was a problem for me when I heard about it. I didn’t like Zay working with Jeezy but the song was so hard. After we established the truce, Jeezy told me to hop on the remix. At the same time I’d just made “Heavy,” which was produced by Shawty Redd, and I told Jeezy he should get on there with me.*  

- Page 132 (location ~ 2011-2028)    

*There was one thing I hadn’t planned for: my newfound popularity with these white hipster kids. Todd had been telling me I had this alternative fan base. “Lemonade” had especially connected with them. My songs were getting remixed by EDM DJs who played huge music festivals around the world. I liked EDM. The big beats, the lights at the shows, the way the crowd responded. It was a world away from the hood-ass clubs in Decatur I was used to, but I liked that my music was touching different audiences. That was cool to me. One of the DJs who was championing my music was Diplo. Apparently he was big in this scene. He’d been nominated for a Grammy for his work on M.I.A.’s song “Paper Planes.” Hoping to further solidify my place in this world, Todd and Coach sent Diplo my a capellas from the Cold War tapes. He recruited a whole gang of DJs and made Free Gucci, a mixtape with EDM remixes of the best songs from the trilogy. It took off. Meanwhile, my shooter-turned-rapper and right-hand man Waka had stepped up in my absence and made a name for himself just like OJ had a year prior. Only this time Waka was carrying the torch for 1017. I’d given Waka his rap name, Waka Flocka Flame, and he took after me by going hard with the mixtapes. But Waka got himself hot with his own sound, his own songs, and his own crew of producers. It wasn’t like what happened with “Make tha Trap Say Aye.” “O Let’s Do It” kicked everything off for Waka. He followed that up with “Hard in Da Paint.” I couldn’t have been prouder of him. The boy was going*  

- Page 138 (location ~ 2115-2127)    

*There was one thing I hadn’t planned for: my newfound popularity with these white hipster kids. Todd had been telling me I had this alternative fan base. “Lemonade” had especially connected with them. My songs were getting remixed by EDM DJs who played huge music festivals around the world. I liked EDM. The big beats, the lights at the shows, the way the crowd responded. It was a world away from the hood-ass clubs in Decatur I was used to, but I liked that my music was touching different audiences. That was cool to me. One of the DJs who was championing my music was Diplo. Apparently he was big in this scene. He’d been nominated for a Grammy for his work on M.I.A.’s song “Paper Planes.” Hoping to further solidify my place in this world, Todd and Coach sent Diplo my a capellas from the Cold War tapes. He recruited a whole gang of DJs and made Free Gucci, a mixtape with EDM remixes of the best songs from the trilogy. It took off. Meanwhile, my shooter-turned-rapper and right-hand man Waka had stepped up in my absence and made a name for himself just like OJ had a year prior. Only this time Waka was carrying the torch for 1017. I’d given Waka his rap name, Waka Flocka Flame, and he took after me by going hard with the mixtapes. But Waka got himself hot with his own sound, his own songs, and his own crew of producers. It wasn’t like what happened with “Make tha Trap Say Aye.” “O Let’s Do It” kicked everything off for Waka. He followed that up with “Hard in Da Paint.” I couldn’t have been prouder of him. The boy was going in.*  

- Page 138 (location ~ 2115-2127)    

*Keyshia Dior. I’d first seen her in Timbaland and Drake’s “Say Something” video not long after I went back to Fulton County. Then I came across her again in XXL’s Eye Candy. She was the new chick in the industry and I had to meet her. I had my assistant Amina book her as soon as we locked in the dates with Boomtown. The first video we shot was for “Everybody Lookin.” The next day I had a photo shoot for Rolling Stone and then another video for “Boy from the Block.” Keyshia wasn’t scheduled to show up until the next day. We were going to shoot a video for “911 Emergency” at Club Life, but I caught word that she had gotten into town a day early. So I told Amina to bring her out to the set of “Boy from the Block.” The magazine photos didn’t do her justice. “You’re gorgeous,” I told her. There was no playing it cool. “Thanks.” She laughed. I must not have been the first one to tell her that. I told Keyshia to stick around after we finished shooting “Boy from the Block” but she turned me down, telling me she’d see me the next day for our scheduled shoot. That only made me want her more. We had such a good time on the set of “911 Emergency” the next day. Amina had hired a whole gang of models for that video but I made sure Keyshia knew she was my leading lady, that she had everything she needed in her dressing room, that she felt comfortable and taken care of. I wanted her to feel good about coming out here. After we wrapped up I practically begged her to stay an extra night in Atlanta so I could take her to dinner. I’d done nothing but work since I got out of jail and this seemed like a break worth taking. She agreed. Keyshia and I went to dinner at the InterContinental Hotel in Buckhead. We were still wearing our all-white matching outfits from the shoot. We ordered the same thing, salmon with mashed potatoes. I took her hand as we left the restaurant. The whole situation was out of character for me. I knew she was special.*  

- Page 143 (location ~ 2181-2197)    

*The promoters never got their deposits back. I still had love for Deb and that whole family. We’d all been through a lot together. But there were too many problems going on with her as my manager. I was at a point in my career where I couldn’t be involved. But Deb had already been fired as Nicki’s manager. So when I did the same, she was in a tough spot. This was her livelihood. Waka was always his own man, but even if he thought his momma was in the wrong, she was still his momma. He was stuck in the middle of a no-win situation. I knew that family very well, so I knew what kinds of things were being said about me in their house. Things were going to get tense. Meanwhile “No Hands” was blowing up and Waka was outgrowing his role as my right-hand man. Everything was different now. Two weeks before The Appeal’s release, I was in Los Angeles, getting ready to walk the red carpet of the MTV Video Music Awards. I was not in a good state of mind. I was becoming more reclusive, combative, paranoid, and isolated. The day before, Todd had called me to discuss a music video and I’d told him never to call me during the daytime again. That he was only allowed to call me after dark. Otherwise, I said, he and I were going to have a serious problem. Outside the VMAs I was with Todd, Waka, Master P, and Joie Manda, the head of urban music at Warner Bros. Really I was alone in my own world. Dressed in black from head to toe, bloodshot eyes behind my sunglasses, I stood in silence, staring blankly into the distance. This would happen from time to time, whenever my benders would reach their tipping point and manifest in the form of bizarre behavior and volatile outbursts. Spells where I would zone out and gaze into space. Sometimes I’d be looking into the mirror, mumbling to myself, trying to make sense of thoughts that didn’t make any sense. Doctors had tried to give me medication for this before. Mood stabilizers. But I rarely took them. They made me even more sluggish. They zapped me of my energy, my creativity, my whole mojo.*  

- Page 150 (location ~ 2288-2303)    

*Moments later ten LAPD officers showed up and proceeded to debate whether I was allowed in the venue. I’d seen other celebrities arrive and walk in without a problem. Why was this happening to me? Why the fuck would these people invite me here and then do this to me? I grew increasingly agitated. It was too little, too late by the time we were allowed to enter the Nokia Theatre. The flash of cameras from the media only angered me more. It felt like they were taunting me. I pulled out the ten-thousand-dollar stack in my pocket and threw it in their faces. “Feathers and glitter weren’t the only things flying around the white carpet; Gucci Mane made his very own contribution by tossing out money—and lots of it. ‘It was during the commercial break. He was on the photography press line and all of a sudden he whipped out a spot of cash, it was quite a bit,’ said producer Matt Harper, who was standing at the top of the carpet. ‘At first he was just sort of showing it to the cameras, and then all of a sudden he just sort of threw it and then there was chaos,’ he continued.” —MTV News (September 20, 2010) I kept replaying the incident in my head during my flight back to Atlanta the next day. Me standing there on the white carpet of the VMAs, watching reporters fight over hundred-dollar bills like I was feeding pigeons. That was so stupid. Why the fuck would I do that? By the time the BET Hip Hop Awards rolled around in October, I was a shell of my former self. The release of The Appeal had come and gone. First-week sales weren’t even bad. It sold sixty thousand copies. But it was nowhere near expectations. That was all my fault. I’d disappeared on the label after they gave me everything I wanted. This wasn’t like when Back to the Trap House bombed. Then I could blame Asylum for putting out an album that misrepresented me as an artist. This was the album I’d wanted to make, and I dropped the ball. I shouldn’t have checked out after “Gucci Time” leaked. I shouldn’t have put out the Buy My Album mixtape with Holiday a week before the album came out without telling anyone. Despite its title that took the attention away from my album. I shouldn’t have bailed on the SPIN magazine photo shoot and ended the interview with their writer. My favorite song from The Appeal, “Making Love to the Money,” had been popping off organically in the clubs, but I went and shot an X-rated video for it at Magic City. It couldn’t be shown anywhere beyond WorldStarHipHop Uncut. I’d made a series of bad decisions. My whole strategy was fucked. There hadn’t even been a strategy. As I stepped onstage to perform “Gucci Time” at the BET Hip Hop Awards, I looked out into the crowd and remembered how it had been just a year before. I’d been sober, laser-focused, a month away from the release of The State vs. Radric Davis. I could see the difference in the crowd now. People weren’t fucking with Gucci Mane like they had been then. Everything was slipping away from me.*  

- Page 151 (location ~ 2304-2328)    

*Things only got worse from there. A lot worse. After the awards I went to Miami Beach, where I holed up in my condo on Allison Island. I arrived with nothing more than $150,000 in cash and my security guard Big Dame, who stood by while I tore it up for a week straight. I didn’t leave the place once. Everything I needed—girls, drugs, drank—was brought to me. It was the type of bender rock stars were known for, not rappers. My phone was blowing up with calls from Coach, Todd, and others concerned for my well-being. But I couldn’t be reasoned with. I’d answer, cuss ’em out, hang up, and get back to whatever vice I happened to be indulging in at that moment. After a week of this an intervention was planned to put an end to the madness. Dame explained that I’d been booked for a last-minute show in Vegas and that they’d chartered a jet to fly me there. Even in the midst of my tailspin, I was still down to make some money, especially if it meant going to Vegas, where I knew I could keep the party going. Dame got me all the way back to Atlanta believing that. I was in such rough shape that even when we landed it didn’t occur to me we’d only been in the air for two hours, less than half the time it takes to get to Vegas from Miami. It wasn’t until we left the airport that I looked around and realized where I was. This was not Vegas. This was home, the last place I wanted to be.*  

- Page 152 (location ~ 2330-2340)    

*The only one I paid the slightest attention to was my lawyer, who was telling me I’d failed another drug test and if I didn’t check myself in, I’d almost certainly be sent to jail. After more than an hour of arguing outside Riverwoods, I relented, agreeing to a monthlong stay. But that shit didn’t last. I wasn’t at the facility a week when I changed my mind and got a buddy to come sign me out. I’d realized I’d already fallen for my lawyer’s line before. I wasn’t doing rehab just so I could get out and get sent right to jail again. The couple of days at the Riverwoods center did little to slow me down. If anything, they were a brief pit stop on my road to total self-destruction. Two weeks after the failed intervention I reached the end of that road at an auto-body shop on Northside Drive. I’d gotten it into my head that this guy who worked on my cars had played me out of some money. This wasn’t just some mechanic. This was a friend of mine, someone who had joined me on the road before. But in my paranoid state, I convinced myself otherwise. I hopped into my Hummer and hit the gas, flying down Northside Drive to confront him at the shop. I must have blazed past a cop on the way, because within minutes of my arrival the law was on the scene. Their presence didn’t affect me. I was irate and growing angrier by the minute, barking at this dude for stealing from me, an accusation that in reality held little water. Except I wasn’t living in reality. I was in a world all my own, one in which everyone in my orbit was plotting against me. The officers demanded I calm down, but that was background noise. I threw a punch. And then another, and another, beating my friend until a blast of pepper spray hit my eyes. I stumbled backward, the two officers wrestling me to the ground and putting me in handcuffs. I was placed in the back seat of the cruiser but I wasn’t done just yet. With my eyes burning, I stomped on the door of the car, so hard that the trim of the vehicle began to break off. An ambulance arrived and I was transported to Grady Hospital Detention Center. After being treated for the pepper spray, I was brought to Fulton County, where I read the list of charges against me. • Damage to government property • Obstruction • Driving without a license • Reckless driving • Running a red light or stop sign • Failure to maintain a lane • Driving on the wrong side of the road Damn. I did all that? I’d get out of lockup the next day, though. Prosecutors dropped every one of those charges citing “for want of prosecution,” meaning I was fucked regardless of the incident at the car shop.*  

- Page 153 (location ~ 2342-2365)    

*The folks at Anchor Hospital may not have believed I was crazy, but the rest of the world was about to be sure of it. Days after being discharged I strolled into Tenth Street Tattoo, a shop around the corner from Patchwerk. I’d spent the previous night at Patchwerk. Atlanta had gotten hit with one of its biggest snowstorms in years and I got snowed in there. When I walked into the shop that day I wasn’t sure of what I wanted to get. I did know where I wanted it done, though. I walked up to the counter, introduced myself to the owner, pointed to my right cheek, and asked him what we could put there. My whole body was covered in tattoos. I’d gotten my first when I was nineteen, around the time I’d first started robbing folks and breaking into houses. It was an eyeball on the back of my neck, a reminder to always watch my back. Since then I’d periodically added more. I already had a bunch of smaller ones on my face but with my skin being so dark, the tattoos under my eyes were hard to make out. I thought it looked like I had two black eyes. I wanted something big, something bold, something unmistakable. With all I’d been through of late I’d never felt more alienated. I was an outcast, a rebel, a weirdo. More than anything I was tired. Tired of running away from my reputation, tired of trying to convince people I wasn’t a bad person. I wanted to embrace being the villain. I wanted to broadcast that I didn’t give a fuck what anyone said or thought about me. I’d just gotten a gold grill put in my mouth and I wanted to alter my appearance even more. “Well, that’s cool, man,” the shop owner told me. His name was Shane. “But, uh, yeah, I can’t really tell you what to put there. Honestly I just have no idea where to start.” I unzipped the orange hoodie I had on to show him my ice cream cone chain. “What about this?” I asked him. “This is my thing.” Shane drew up my soon-to-be-infamous ice cream cone tattoo. It was perfect. Almost perfect. It needed something else. “Just make that shit real rock-and-roll,” I told him. With that he added the lightning bolts and the letters “BRRR,” and got to work. An hour later, I was out of there and*  

- Page 156 (location ~ 2378-2396)    

*The folks at Anchor Hospital may not have believed I was crazy, but the rest of the world was about to be sure of it. Days after being discharged I strolled into Tenth Street Tattoo, a shop around the corner from Patchwerk. I’d spent the previous night at Patchwerk. Atlanta had gotten hit with one of its biggest snowstorms in years and I got snowed in there. When I walked into the shop that day I wasn’t sure of what I wanted to get. I did know where I wanted it done, though. I walked up to the counter, introduced myself to the owner, pointed to my right cheek, and asked him what we could put there. My whole body was covered in tattoos. I’d gotten my first when I was nineteen, around the time I’d first started robbing folks and breaking into houses. It was an eyeball on the back of my neck, a reminder to always watch my back. Since then I’d periodically added more. I already had a bunch of smaller ones on my face but with my skin being so dark, the tattoos under my eyes were hard to make out. I thought it looked like I had two black eyes. I wanted something big, something bold, something unmistakable. With all I’d been through of late I’d never felt more alienated. I was an outcast, a rebel, a weirdo. More than anything I was tired. Tired of running away from my reputation, tired of trying to convince people I wasn’t a bad person. I wanted to embrace being the villain. I wanted to broadcast that I didn’t give a fuck what anyone said or thought about me. I’d just gotten a gold grill put in my mouth and I wanted to alter my appearance even more. “Well, that’s cool, man,” the shop owner told me. His name was Shane. “But, uh, yeah, I can’t really tell you what to put there. Honestly I just have no idea where to start.” I unzipped the orange hoodie I had on to show him my ice cream cone chain. “What about this?” I asked him. “This is my thing.” Shane drew up my soon-to-be-infamous ice cream cone tattoo. It was perfect. Almost perfect. It needed something else. “Just make that shit real rock-and-roll,” I told him. With that he added the lightning bolts and the letters “BRRR,” and got to work. An hour later, I was out of there and on my way to Patchwerk. I was feeling good about the tattoo. It was what I’d been going for.*  

- Page 156 (location ~ 2378-2397)    

*The mixtape would mark the beginning of a shift in my sound. I’d always been the one who made trap music fun and colorful, but that Gucci, the one with the memorable ad-libs and different characters, that guy was gone. I couldn’t get back to that because it wasn’t who I was anymore. I became so determined to get back into the winner’s circle that I lost sight of how making music was supposed to be fun. I was spending more time in the studio than ever before and I was definitely rapping my ass off, but the songs coming out were just different. I was angry. I was resentful. I felt like I’d been dealt a bad hand. I missed Keyshia. As much as I tried to bury those emotions with lean, weed, and reckless spending, they always ended up surfacing, especially in the music.*  

- Page 158 (location ~ 2415-2420)    

*Jackson State is a diagnostic prison, a waiting room. It’s a place where teams of prison officials, counselors, and medical professionals determine which of Georgia’s thirty-one state prisons an inmate gets sent to. Unless you’re on death row. Then Jackson State’s your last stop. As soon as I got there I had my head shaved. Then I was made to strip naked alongside the rest of the incoming inmates in the intake room, with the COs watching us. After I bent over for a cavity search they sent me to the showers. I was given a small bottle of shampoo and told to apply it not only to my now bald head but to my pubic hair as well. It was lice-killing shampoo. After the shower I was given a white prison jumpsuit, photographed for my prison ID, and brought to “H House,” solitary confinement, where I spent the remainder of my time at Jackson State. Being in the hole again was horrible. It was sweltering in there. No air circulation at all. And the rats . . . I hadn’t been in my cell five minutes when I saw one scurry by with a tail that was longer than me. I swear the rats were the size of cats in that place. I never thought I’d be so happy to be back at Fulton County when I was transferred back three weeks later. I’d spend another month in county jail before I was freed. Again, I felt like I’d missed a lot. Even though I was only gone for three months—my shortest stretch since my sixty days in DeKalb County a decade earlier—a lot had happened. On the music front, there were two new guys in the city making a lot of noise: 2 Chainz and Future. I’d known 2 Chainz for fifteen years. He’s actually BP’s cousin. I knew 2 Chainz from when he was Tity Boi and he was rolling with Ludacris in the nineties. He’d had a taste of fame in 2007 with a song called “Duffle Bag Boy,” but he and Dolla Boy, the other nigga in the group Playaz Circle, weren’t able to follow it up. But Tity Boi was on his own now and he was going by 2 Chainz. And shit finally seemed to be working out well for him. Future, on the other hand, was someone I’d met only recently. He was from East Atlanta by Kirkwood, an area they call Lil’ Mexico. It’s nearby, but in Atlanta you can be two streets over and you’re in a totally different neighborhood. He was a few years younger too, so we’d never crossed paths coming up. Future was the cousin of Rico Wade, from the legendary production team Organized Noize. He’d come up in Atlanta’s fabled Dungeon Family, around OutKast and Goodie Mob and Bubba Sparxxx. Back then he was rapping under the name Meathead but now he was Future, and he was rolling with my partner Rocko.*  

- Page 161 (location ~ 2455-2475)    

*It wasn’t until one day when it was just me and Mike Will at Patchwerk that we got back to solid. After that we were in sync. Mike Will had really stepped his game up since ’07 and he was giving me some of his hardest beats. His ringtone was “Ain’t No Way Around It,” one of the big songs he had with Future. “You gotta give me some shit like that,” I told him. “Yeah? Well, go in on this,” he told me, loading up the next beat. That song became “Nasty,” which Mike Will came up with the hook for. After doing my verse I stepped out of the booth and asked him who else we should get on it. “Future, bro,” he told me. “Future would snap on this.” “You love you some Future, huh?” The next day Future came through and hopped on “Nasty.” A couple of hours later 2 Chainz pulled up and the three of us did another song called “Lost It.” Afterward, Future and I were talking and he asked me what I thought about us doing a whole mixtape together. “Cool,” I told him. “Let’s do it.” Future couldn’t believe it was that easy. “That’s why I fuck with you, Gucci,” he said. “Ever since I got in this game shit’s never been that simple. But I asked you straight up to do a mixtape and you were down. Simple as that.” “No problem,” I told him. “We’re already here.” Not only did I fuck with Future’s music, but he was certified Zone 6 and that made me even more inclined to work with him. Also I liked what a studio rat this dude was. I recorded every day but I also hit the clubs at night and enjoyed myself. Future didn’t leave the studio. All he did was record. This guy’s work ethic was giving me a run for my money, so I knew the two of us would knock out a mixtape in no time. That’s exactly what we did. Free Bricks was out three weeks to the day I came back from jail.*  

- Page 163 (location ~ 2497-2513)    

*I’d been approached by Joie Manda with the idea of doing a joint mixtape with this white chick from Oakland. V-Nasty. I didn’t know a thing about the girl, but when Joie told me these folks wanted to pay me a couple of hundred grand, I didn’t need to know anything about her. She flew in and we knocked out the mixtape in like three days. V-Nasty turned out to be a controversial artist, being a white girl who said “nigga,” but I thought she was cool and I enjoyed doing that tape. All I did was freestyle over twelve Zay beats. Business as usual. Easy money.*  

- Page 165 (location ~ 2516-2520)    

*Everybody knows Zay is my go-to producer. The thing is since day one, Zay and I have been each other’s biggest fan. I’ll rap over whatever beat Zay plays me and whatever I do on there, Zay thinks it’s hard as hell. That’s just how it’s always been with us. Working with Mike Will is different. Even though he’s nearly ten years my junior, Mike Will is highly opinionated with his ideas. He lets you know what he thinks should be happening on any given album, song, verse, or hook. He’s a perfectionist. Mike Will will get up from behind the boards and walk into the booth to tell me what he thinks I should be doing differently. I remember Coach told him not to do that when we got back to working together, but Mike Will didn’t pay him no mind. The guy has confidence and is an asset in the studio. He pushes me. The week I came home Mike Will and I locked in at Patchwerk for the making of Trap Back The Return of Mr. Zone 6 and Free Bricks had been steps in the right direction, but I had hiccups having to go back to jail. This one was going to be my comeback mixtape. I’d written a bunch of raps in jail and started up recording those, but after a few songs Mike Will told me to throw that shit away and get back to freestyling like we’d been doing over the summer. Zay would never say something like that to me. The other difference between the two is that Mike Will would stay in the studio all night. From day one Zay has always been family first, so if we’re not working out of his crib, he’s doing a few songs, then going home. Zay doesn’t smoke, drink, or shoot dice and he’s not about sticking around while I record over other producers’ beats. If it was up to him, I’d be recording exclusively over his shit. Mike Will’s not like that. He’ll be there the whole night, regardless of whether it’s his beats I’m rapping on or Zay’s or Drumma Boy’s or Sonny Digital’s or whoever’s. And he’s always got an opinion on what’s going on. “Man, I don’t really like how you did those ad-libs,” he’d tell me. “You really need to do those over.” “I know you can make something harder than that. Let’s get back to the old Gucci.” There are not a lot of folks comfortable talking to me like that and truthfully I like it that way. Mike Will has me feeling like this shit is a job sometimes. Recording is supposed to be fun, and redoing verses and ad-libs is not my idea of a good time. It’s not something I typically do. But when we were working on Trap Back I could tell that Mike Will wanted to see me come back and win just as bad as I wanted it. He knew what time it was. When the tape dropped a month later the hard work proved to be worthwhile.*  

- Page 166 (location ~ 2539-2559)    

*The last scene I shot was my big sex scene and by that point I was exhausted. There had been pounds of this fake herbal weed on set, but that junk gave me a headache, so I stuck to smoking Kush and of course I was drinking lean too. It was four in the morning and even with these two naked bad bitches on me—one riding me while the other sucked my toes—I couldn’t keep my eyes open. I was knocked out, snoring in the middle of the movie set. Harmony kept having to wake me up for takes. Somehow I managed to wake up long enough to ad-lib what has got to be one of the best lines of that whole movie. I feel like you’re playing Mozart on my dick. Even though I was high as hell the whole time I did Spring Breakers, I got a lot out of that experience. To work with a director as talented as Harmony and play opposite James Franco in my first film was a blessing. I learned a lot watching James Franco do his thing. The whole way he approached his character was superimpressive. He was all in, fully immersed as Alien. He played the hell out of that role. He knew his craft like I knew the rap game. Working with the girls was great too. Rachel Korine shared her husband’s love for my music and Ashley Benson wanted to take a photo with my chain on. Despite crazy rumors that came out that something happened with me and Selena Gomez, we never even met during the making of the movie. We didn’t share any scenes together. Regardless, I appreciated her part in it. The whole thing was just a positive working environment. A good vibe. Harmony was a hard boss but it made for a dope movie. And he also turned out to be a cool person. He became a friend for life during our time working together.*  

- Page 170 (location ~ 2592-2605)    

*Everybody knows Zay is my go-to producer. The thing is since day one, Zay and I have been each other’s biggest fan. I’ll rap over whatever beat Zay plays me and whatever I do on there, Zay thinks it’s hard as hell. That’s just how it’s always been with us. Working with Mike Will is different. Even though he’s nearly ten years my junior, Mike Will is highly opinionated with his ideas. He lets you know what he thinks should be happening on any given album, song, verse, or hook. He’s a perfectionist. Mike Will will get up from behind the boards and walk into the booth to tell me what he thinks I should be doing differently. I remember Coach told him not to do that when we got back to working together, but Mike Will didn’t pay him no mind. The guy has confidence and is an asset in the studio. He pushes me. The week I came home Mike Will and I locked in at Patchwerk for the making of Trap Back The Return of Mr. Zone 6 and Free Bricks had been steps in the right direction, but I had hiccups having to go back to jail. This one was going to be my comeback mixtape. I’d written a bunch of raps in jail and started up recording those, but after a few songs Mike Will told me to throw that shit away and get back to freestyling like we’d been doing over the summer. Zay would never say something like that to me. The other difference between the two is that Mike Will would stay in the studio all night. From day one Zay has always been family first, so if we’re not working out of his crib, he’s doing a few songs, then going home. Zay doesn’t smoke, drink, or shoot dice and he’s not about sticking around while I record over other producers’ beats. If it was up to him, I’d be recording exclusively over his shit. Mike Will’s not like that. He’ll be there the whole night, regardless of whether it’s his beats I’m rapping on or Zay’s or Drumma Boy’s or Sonny Digital’s or whoever’s. And he’s always got an opinion on what’s going on. “Man, I don’t really like how you did those ad-libs,” he’d tell me. “You really need to do those over.” “I know you can make something harder than that. Let’s get back to the old Gucci.” There are not a lot of folks comfortable talking to me like that and truthfully I like it that way. Mike Will has me feeling like this shit is a job sometimes. Recording is supposed to be fun, and redoing verses and ad-libs is not my idea of a good time. It’s not something I typically do. But when we were working on Trap Back I could tell that Mike Will wanted to see me come back and win just as bad as I wanted it. He knew what time it was. When the tape dropped a month later the hard work proved to be worthwhile. “Trap Back is easily the strongest release from Gucci Mane since, possibly, 2008. On this project Gucci sounds clear, concise, and back focused on his career.” —AllHipHop.com “With Trap Back, Gucci Mane is back in his element. He’s removed himself from the curiosity of BAYTL and returned to the vice-indulging-laced lyrics and the system-shattering soundscapes that fueled his initial ascent. Bundle up.” —XXL “The other reason Trap Back is great is the increasingly prominent Atlanta producer Mike Will Made It, who continues to demonstrate that he has an ear for the smallest details that make a simple rap song a great rap song. His sound is like a Flubberized blending of Zaytoven’s 8-bit pings and Drumma Boy’s funeral marches: it’s menacing and playful all at once, which means it’s a perfect match for Gucci’s style. In a development that really shouldn’t have taken this long, he flips the Tetris theme into trap music for Gucci to rap on for ‘Get It Back.’ The instrumental could serve as a neatly boiled-down synopsis of Gucci’s style: simple, deceptively absorbing, maddeningly addictive, frantically paced. Drumma Boy also swings by, and Zaytoven contributes some of his gangsta tinker-toy productions. The result isn’t a revelation exactly, but it’s the most recognizably Gucci-ish Gucci release in some time.” —Pitchfork It was true. For the first time in a long time, I was starting to feel like me again. The biggest record on Trap Back was “Plain Jane,” which Mike Will produced and Rocko was featured on. This shit killed the streets. The love I was getting from the critics was great, but I was seeing the impact of “Plain Jane” in Atlanta and every other city I went to. It was fucking people up. It never got serviced to radio or made an official single, but to this day I can’t do a show without performing “Plain Jane.” It became an immediate fan favorite. The response from “Plain Jane” and Trap Back on the whole got me going again. I wasn’t where I wanted to be but I was on my way. Shit just felt like it was getting back. On top of the music I had gotten an offer to be in a movie. I had signed on to do Spring Breakers a year before. I was in Bloomington, Minnesota, for a show and was walking through the Mall of America when my cell phone rang. It was Mariah Carey. Mariah and I had gotten cool when we did “Obsessed” in 2009, but she had never called me out of the blue before. I knew that she was pregnant with twins and supposed to be giving birth any day now, so I wondered what could be so important for her to be calling me. “Gucci, do you remember Brett Ratner?” she asked me. “He’s the guy who directed the music video for ‘Obsessed’? He wants to put you in this movie. This could be a great opportunity for you.” Brett Ratner wasn’t the director of Spring Breakers, though. It was a guy named Harmony Korine. Apparently he was a huge fan of mine. He’d asked Brett, a friend of his, to get in touch with me for this role. Harmony’s name didn’t register with me at first but then I found out this was the guy who made the crazy, fucked-up movie Kids in the nineties. I’d seen another film of his too, Gummo. Both those movies were some dark, twisted shit but I’d liked ’em. Harmony wanted me in Spring Breakers so badly that he postponed filming until after my two little stints in jail in 2011, and he was going to pay me a whole bunch of money to play the role of Archie. Archie was the bad guy, the former friend turned foe of the main character Alien, played by James Franco. His name I knew. This was a major motion picture. I didn’t need to know much more. Sign me up. I spent two weeks in St. Petersburg, Florida, filming Spring Breakers. Harmony got his money’s worth out of me. I had no idea making a movie would be so time-consuming. We were working twelve-hour days and then I was going out at night on top of that for shows and appearances. The last scene I shot was my big sex scene and by that point I was exhausted. There had been pounds of this fake herbal weed on set, but that junk gave me a headache, so I stuck to smoking Kush and of course I was drinking lean too. It was four in the morning and even with these two naked bad bitches on me—one riding me while the other sucked my toes—I couldn’t keep my eyes open. I was knocked out, snoring in the middle of the movie set. Harmony kept having to wake me up for takes. Somehow I managed to wake up long enough to ad-lib what has got to be one of the best lines of that whole movie. I feel like you’re playing Mozart on my dick. Even though I was high as hell the whole time I did Spring Breakers, I got a lot out of that experience. To work with a director as talented as Harmony and play opposite James Franco in my first film was a blessing. I learned a lot watching James Franco do his thing. The whole way he approached his character was superimpressive. He was all in, fully immersed as Alien. He played the hell out of that role. He knew his craft like I knew the rap game. Working with the girls was great too. Rachel Korine shared her husband’s love for my music and Ashley Benson wanted to take a photo with my chain on. Despite crazy rumors that came out that something happened with me and Selena Gomez, we never even met during the making of the movie. We didn’t share any scenes together. Regardless, I appreciated her part in it. The whole thing was just a positive working environment. A good vibe. Harmony was a hard boss but it made for a dope movie. And he also turned out to be a cool person. He became a friend for life during our time working together.*  

- Page 166 (location ~ 2539-2605)    

*Even though I was high as hell the whole time I did Spring Breakers, I got a lot out of that experience. To work with a director as talented as Harmony and play opposite James Franco in my first film was a blessing. I learned a lot watching James Franco do his thing. The whole way he approached his character was superimpressive. He was all in, fully immersed as Alien. He played the hell out of that role. He knew his craft like I knew the rap game. Working with the girls was great too. Rachel Korine shared her husband’s love for my music and Ashley Benson wanted to take a photo with my chain on. Despite crazy rumors that came out that something happened with me and Selena Gomez, we never even met during the making of the movie. We didn’t share any scenes together. Regardless, I appreciated her part in it. The whole thing was just a positive working environment. A good vibe. Harmony was a hard boss but it made for a dope movie. And he also*  

- Page 170 (location ~ 2597-2604)    

*Even though I was high as hell the whole time I did Spring Breakers, I got a lot out of that experience. To work with a director as talented as Harmony and play opposite James Franco in my first film was a blessing. I learned a lot watching James Franco do his thing. The whole way he approached his character was superimpressive. He was all in, fully immersed as Alien. He played the hell out of that role. He knew his craft like I knew the rap game. Working with the girls was great too. Rachel Korine shared her husband’s love for my music and Ashley Benson wanted to take a photo with my chain on. Despite crazy rumors that came out that something happened with me and Selena Gomez, we never even met during the making of the movie. We didn’t share any scenes together. Regardless, I appreciated her part in it. The whole thing was just a positive working environment. A good vibe. Harmony was a hard boss but it made for a dope movie. And he also turned out to be a cool person. He became a friend for life during our time working together. Spring Breakers inspired me to get on my Gucci Spielberg*  

- Page 170 (location ~ 2597-2606)    

*Even though I was high as hell the whole time I did Spring Breakers, I got a lot out of that experience. To work with a director as talented as Harmony and play opposite James Franco in my first film was a blessing. I learned a lot watching James Franco do his thing. The whole way he approached his character was superimpressive. He was all in, fully immersed as Alien. He played the hell out of that role. He knew his craft like I knew the rap game. Working with the girls was great too. Rachel Korine shared her husband’s love for my music and Ashley Benson wanted to take a photo with my chain on. Despite crazy rumors that came out that something happened with me and Selena Gomez, we never even met during the making of the movie. We didn’t share any scenes together. Regardless, I appreciated her part in it. The whole thing was just a positive working environment. A good vibe. Harmony was a hard boss but it made for a dope movie. And he also turned out to be a cool person. He became a friend for life during our time working together.*  

- Page 170 (location ~ 2597-2605)    

*Peewee was always this little, funny, charming nigga whom people just seemed to gravitate toward. Everyone I knew liked Peewee and he was very much respected from his dealings in the streets. So I didn’t really need to hear Peewee’s music to know I wanted to sign him. The music was the easy part. That shit I could help him out with. And once I did, I already knew Peewee was someone who would be well received in Atlanta. I had twenty-five thousand dollars in cash waiting for him when he came to the studio a few days later. But Peewee had other plans. “You ain’t even got to worry about paying me, bro,” he said. “What I really want is for you to sign my young boys here.” “I’m pretty much set on signing you, Peewee,” I told him. “But if this is what you really want, then tell me about your boys.” That’s when Peewee introduced me to Young Thug. Not only had I never met Thug, but I’d never heard a word about him. But I took a look at this tall, skinny kid with a bunch of tattoos on his face like me and I got the feeling he could be something. He definitely had a look. Peewee wanted me to sign Thug as part of a three-man crew, but it was clear who the diamond in the rough was. So I took the twenty-five thousand I’d had ready for Peewee, gave it to Young Thug, and signed him on the spot. I hadn’t known him longer than thirty minutes.*  

- Page 178 (location ~ 2718-2729)    

*Migos were from Gwinnett County, north of Atlanta, so it took them an hour or so to get to the studio. When they did show up, it was just two of them. The third, Offset, was locked up in DeKalb County on a parole violation. The first thing I noticed about these boys was that they had on a bunch of fake-ass jewelry. I took two gold necklaces off my neck, gave one to each of them, and told them I wanted them to be on my label. I’d taken out forty-five thousand dollars, fifteen thousand for each of them. Quavo and Takeoff were on board, but I needed to make sure the third guy, Offset, was too. I wanted this group as I’d first seen them, as a trio. They got Offset on the phone from jail. He didn’t need much convincing. I asked him what he wanted me to do with his share of the money and he told me to hold on to it for him until he got out. And with that Migos were on Brick Squad. Quavo and Takeoff headed home with plans to return the next day and get to work. Shortly after Migos left, Scooter called me out of the booth while I was recording. There was something I needed to see. “You see those boys threw their jewelry in the trash can?” I figured Scooter was trying to be funny, making a joke about those bullshit chains. But I looked in the trash can and sure enough, there they were. Quavo and Takeoff had thrown out their old chains after I’d given them real jewelry. We had a laugh at that one. Migos would be the last addition to the new team. I came so close*  

- Page 179 (location ~ 2745-2756)    

*Migos were from Gwinnett County, north of Atlanta, so it took them an hour or so to get to the studio. When they did show up, it was just two of them. The third, Offset, was locked up in DeKalb County on a parole violation. The first thing I noticed about these boys was that they had on a bunch of fake-ass jewelry. I took two gold necklaces off my neck, gave one to each of them, and told them I wanted them to be on my label. I’d taken out forty-five thousand dollars, fifteen thousand for each of them. Quavo and Takeoff were on board, but I needed to make sure the third guy, Offset, was too. I wanted this group as I’d first seen them, as a trio. They got Offset on the phone from jail. He didn’t need much convincing. I asked him what he wanted me to do with his share of the money and he told me to hold on to it for him until he got out. And with that Migos were on Brick Squad. Quavo and Takeoff headed home with plans to return the next day and get to work. Shortly after Migos left, Scooter called me out of the booth while I was recording. There was something I needed to see. “You see those boys threw their jewelry in the trash can?” I figured Scooter was trying to be funny, making a joke about those bullshit chains. But I looked in the trash can and sure enough, there they were. Quavo and Takeoff had thrown out their old chains after I’d given them real jewelry. We had a laugh at that one.*  

- Page 179 (location ~ 2745-2756)    

*The studio took on a life of its own. At any given time, someone would be in there working. At full capacity there might be thirty people in the building. I might be in one room with C4 or Honorable C.N.O.T.E. working on Trap House 3 while Thug was in the next, recording his 1017 Thug mixtape with one of the 808 Mafia producers. Or Metro Boomin might be in a room just cookin’ up some beats by himself. Or Migos might be downstairs doing their own thing. Scooter and Waka were both on the road a lot then, but whenever they were in town they’d be there too. Even the artists who never officially signed with me were always welcome and I did mixtapes with all of them—EAST ATLANTA MEMPHIS with Dolph, Money Pounds Ammunition with Peewee, Trust God Fuck 12 with Rich Homie Quan. It was a 24/7 operation with an open-door policy for any rapper or producer I fucked with to come be a part of what we had going on. I gave those boys hell whenever they tried to leave. Take a nap on the couch if you tired, I’d tell ’em. If one of the engineers got tired, I’d sit down and record Peewee or Thug myself. If you need a break from recording, let’s roll something up. Or pour something up. Or shoot some dice. Ain’t no need to leave the studio. The Brick Factory was some hippie commune shit. Outlaws playing by our own set of rules. A tale of true American counterculture.*  

- Page 181 (location ~ 2761-2771)    

*Harmony had us seated in the theater next to Marilyn Manson and his girlfriend at the time, Lindsay. Harmony and Marilyn were buddies, and Harmony thought the two of us would hit it off. Harmony swung by our seats to introduce us, but as it turned out Marilyn and I had already met on the red carpet earlier. Lindsay complimented Keyshia on her lipstick and the two of them struck up a conversation. “Looks like we both got us some fancy bitches,” was the first thing Marilyn Manson said to me. The four of us hit it off and ended up hanging the rest of the night. Marilyn and I chopped it up about music and our shared love for the city of Miami. After the movie we hit an after-party, and after the after-party, Marilyn and I hit a studio where we made “Fancy Bitch,” a song inspired by our first interaction. Marilyn Manson turned out to be a cool, down-to-earth dude. I didn’t know a lot about him beyond his wild persona in music. I respected how he could let his guard down and be a regular person when the camera wasn’t rolling. In the rap game there are so many people who feel like they need to keep the tough-guy shit going 24/7 and can’t even hold a conversation.*  

- Page 182 (location ~ 2781-2790)    

*When I beat the odds and got released from DeKalb County Jail three weeks after my arrest, I didn’t call up any of them. I’d deal with the insubordination later. I had Trap House 3 on the way and I’d made the decision to bump up its release date so I could put it out ahead of Memorial Day weekend. To me, Trap House 3 was the culmination of my comeback, a return to form that started when I came home from jail in 2011 and locked in with Mike Will for Trap Back Trap House 3 was some of the hardest music I’d made in years and I just knew that if I could get people listening to it as they headed down to Miami or Puerto Rico or Myrtle Beach for Black Bike Week, this album would be the soundtrack of their summer. The sooner everyone heard TRAP HOUSE 3, the sooner they were going to get talking about my music again and not the incident at Harlem Nights or my problems with Waka. I was released under the stipulation that I wear an ankle monitor and remain under house arrest when I wasn’t traveling for work. When I accepted those terms, I listed the studio as my residence instead of my apartment in Atlantic Station so that I could still record. I wouldn’t have been able to go to the Brick Factory otherwise, so at first this seemed like a good move. But trapping myself at the studio proved to be a terrible decision.*  

- Page 185 (location ~ 2832-2842)    

*But I couldn’t enjoy Trap House 3’s success. I was growing increasingly more anxious. I had an open assault case. A probation violation hearing on the horizon. Defecting artists. My old rap beefs were back on. The unease at the studio made me stress. And as it always did, my stress manifested itself as intense dread and paranoia. Much of this paranoia was the product of the drugs—delusions brought on by weed and promethazine and codeine syrup coursing through me. I was always high. But there was a legitimacy to my fears as well. My mind was unraveling, no doubt about it, but I really was in the same studio my friend got killed in. I’d experienced people with guns looking to kill me before. I was legally confined to this building, which was in a neighborhood where I’d accumulated a lot of enemies over the past twenty years. That shit was real. I couldn’t sleep. So I drank more lean and smoked more weed. My intake was beyond anything before and my addiction had become unsustainably expensive. The lean was a thousand dollars a pint and I was drinking almost a pint a day. The weed was a few hundred dollars an ounce and I was smoking an ounce a day. More than a grand a day on drugs alone. And those were just the basic necessities. Anything else I came across—Percocets, Xanax bars, molly, whatever really—would get tossed in the mix too.*  

- Page 187 (location ~ 2857-2867)    

*The money I was sinking into drugs was the least of my concerns. I needed this stuff. It was the only thing that could calm me, even if it was temporary. When I did catch some sleep, it wasn’t like I was tucked in bed for a restful night. I was nodding out during recording sessions. I was falling out of chairs. I would take too much of something and throw it up. Things were getting bad again. I could feel it. But I didn’t know how to stop it. The studio got broken into. I found out who it was when I reviewed the surveillance footage. When I told them I didn’t want them coming by anymore, it didn’t go well. Now I had problems with niggas who stayed right around the corner. Niggas with very little to lose. Earlier in the summer I’d done an interview where I called my new studio the Fort Knox of the hood. At the time I’d said it in jest because of the gate and surveillance cameras. But now the Brick Factory looked more like an armory than a place where music was made. There were guns everywhere. I could see the look on people’s faces when they came through. My studio was no longer a fun place to be. Onetime regulars were dropping like flies. I was still recording like hell. I’d dropped three mixtapes at once—the World War 3: Molly, Gas, and Lean series—and now I was working on a new project. Diary of a Trap God. A lot of the songs on there—“Decapitated,” “Half,” “High Power Cowards,” “Keep It Real”—were recorded during my darkest days, trapped in*  

- Page 187 (location ~ 2867-2878)    

*The money I was sinking into drugs was the least of my concerns. I needed this stuff. It was the only thing that could calm me, even if it was temporary. When I did catch some sleep, it wasn’t like I was tucked in bed for a restful night. I was nodding out during recording sessions. I was falling out of chairs. I would take too much of something and throw it up. Things were getting bad again. I could feel it. But I didn’t know how to stop it. The studio got broken into. I found out who it was when I reviewed the surveillance footage. When I told them I didn’t want them coming by anymore, it didn’t go well. Now I had problems with niggas who stayed right around the corner. Niggas with very little to lose. Earlier in the summer I’d done an interview where I called my new studio the Fort Knox of the hood. At the time I’d said it in jest because of the gate and surveillance cameras. But now the Brick Factory looked more like an armory than a place where music was made. There were guns everywhere. I could see the look on people’s faces when they came through. My studio was no longer a fun place to be. Onetime regulars were dropping like flies. I was still recording like hell. I’d dropped three mixtapes at once—the World War 3: Molly, Gas, and Lean series—and now I was working on a new project. Diary of a Trap God. A lot of the songs on there—“Decapitated,” “Half,” “High Power Cowards,” “Keep It Real”—were recorded during my darkest days, trapped in my brick prison. I was slurring my words bad on those songs. I’d never sounded so congested.*  

- Page 187 (location ~ 2867-2879)    

*I made contact with the male later identified as Mr. Radric Davis (AKA Gucci man). I informed him who I was, and who I worked for. At this moment Mr. Davis asked what did I want? I informed him that his friends called the police because they were worried about him and want to get him some help. While talking to Mr. Davis I could smell the strong odor of marijuana coming from his person and I also observed a bulge which appeared to be a handgun in his right front pocket. I didn’t ask any questions because I didn’t want to escalate the situation due to him already being irate. Mr. Radric Davis was yelling that he wanted the police to drive him to his mother’s house in Douglasville and that he didn’t need anything else from us. Mr. Davis was informed that we could not go out that far but we would call him an ambulance. At this time more officers had arrived on scene to help assist me with Mr. Davis. Mr. Davis was acting irate by yelling and cursing and threatening police. Once other officers were on scene Mr. Davis got more irate and started to threaten police again and advise that he would shoot us up. Mr. Davis also stated to police that we were gay-ass officers and that we were “homos” trying to fuck him and that we must like men. At this time Mr. Davis was arrested for disorderly conduct and searched incident to the arrest. While searching Mr. Davis, I located a clear plastic baggie containing suspected marijuana and a loaded black .40 Cal Glock handgun from Mr. Davis’s right jean pocket.*  

- Page 192 (location ~ 2930-2942)    

*I didn’t sleep that night. I couldn’t. I knew what was coming. My mind had been warning me withdrawal was on the way, but it was my body that let me know it had arrived. This was not a mental craving for lean. I was familiar with that feeling. This was dope sickness. My body was starving for lean like it was food. Screaming for it. I was in terrible pain—stomach cramps, sweats, shakes, vomiting, and diarrhea—alone in my cell. As I sat on the toilet trembling, breathing heavy, my insides emptying out of me, I hung my head. I closed my eyes and wondered if I’d ever felt pain anywhere close to this. The extradition from Miami to Fulton County in ’05 You were shackled in chains on that bus for two days straight. I remembered how I got through that. How Big Cat had seen a look of defeat on my face as I was escorted out of the FBI office. How he told me to keep my head up. I remembered how his words carried me through that bus ride and so many other hard times in the years that followed. I remembered that as low as my lows had gotten, I always had faith in myself. That I always knew if I could get past those temporary moments, eventually I’d be up again. Jail couldn’t beat me. Lean couldn’t beat me. No situation could beat me. I was the only one who could beat me. I lifted my head. I opened my eyes. I’d made it through another round on the toilet. I was still in the middle of opiate withdrawal. Still exhausted and somehow wide awake. Still aching. Still sweating. Still angry. Still anxious. Still alone. But I wasn’t hopeless. I was going to get through this.*  

- Page 194 (location ~ 2963-2976)    

*I started with a run up and down a flight of steps. It was all I could do and I was out of breath. Then I ran up and down twice. Then three times. The next day I did five. A week later I did twenty. Very quickly the routine became like another addiction to me and between that and barely eating the snack food they serve in county jail, the pounds started falling right off. I wasn’t the only one who noticed. You looking good, Gucci. Your skin looks a lot better, Gucci. You talking better, bro. I looked different from the man in my September mug shot. And I felt different. Sharper. Stronger. More at ease. The exercise was helping me deal with stress. I wanted to push myself harder, transform myself further. When I did get out, whenever that was, I wanted to be able to go on tour and have the energy to put on a show for my fans. I wanted to be able to keep up with a hectic schedule without falling apart. I wanted to look good doing it. I wanted Keyshia to lose her mind when she came to pick me up. When that would be was out of my control, but I could control whether I was ready for that moment when it came. So I kept running up and down those steps.*  

- Page 197 (location ~ 3021-3031)    

*Young people are searching for the truth. It’s why little kids say some of the rudest shit sometimes. Like they’ll tell somebody they’re fat or ugly. Most of the time those people are ugly as hell. The youngins just don’t know yet that they’re not supposed to say those kinds of things. As they get older they learn to put on the mask and pretend. Those kids gravitated toward me because I was the closest thing to an established artist who said what he meant and meant what he said. That’s called authenticity. I don’t walk around acting hard but I do go anywhere that I want. Any club, any mall, any block, any hood. They see that I’m not hiding behind my music and they respect that. They like it that I’ll show up to T.I.’s party looking like a walking lick. They like that I’ll go to Macon and perform “The Truth.” They like that they can catch me riding around Zone 6 in a Phantom with no security. Part of being young is being brave. And part of being brave is being a little brazen, being a little reckless. It’s safe to say I’ve always been that. When they meet other established artists and it’s not the same, that can be hard for them. If they’re smart, they can figure out how to work industry relationships to their benefit. If they’re not, they’ll get used as pawns. For niggas like Thug and Peewee, coming from the world they came from, it’s not easy to flip a switch and all of a sudden be able to play the fake political games of the music business. Those boys were really in the streets. As much as Thug may have wanted to make it in music, he could never have been an errand boy for some big-name rapper waiting for his boss to put him on. He’s not a yes man. That shit is not in him.*  

- Page 203 (location ~ 3103-3115)    

*The United States Penitentiary in Terre Haute was not like the federal facilities I’d just come from in Lovejoy, Leavenworth, or Oklahoma City. And it was nothing like county jail. A maximum-security federal penitentiary is different. There’s a certain level of violence in any correctional facility but here it was intrinsic. It lived in the concrete walls. In the steel doors. It was always hanging in the air. I was surrounded by lifers and men on death row. The Aryan Brotherhood, MS-13, Crips, Bloods, mob bosses, terrorists. This was where the Oklahoma City bomber got the lethal injection. A few months after I got there I saw on the news that they were sending the Boston Marathon Bomber here to await his death. They call it Guantánamo North. I knew I’d fucked up but I didn’t belong here. It reminded me of when they had me a few doors down from Brian Nichols in Fulton County. This has to be a mistake. But I’m a man wherever you land me. Regardless of where that is or who is in front of me, there’s a standard that I hold myself to and a certain level of respect I expect to be treated with. When I first got to the USP there was a whole bunch of hoopla about my arrival, because for somebody doing life, having a celebrity in general population is exciting. It’s something to write home about. So I had to make it clear I wasn’t there for any dick-riding groupie shit or to be a part of the world they had going on here. I was here to do my time, protect myself, and then leave. That ain’t even on some tough-guy shit. Hell, I was scared too. When people talk about prison you often hear them talk about wolves and sheep. To survive you’ve got to be a wolf. But here it was all wolves. Tough guys were getting killed here every day. You could be Gucci. You could be Al Capone. It didn’t matter because they’d kill your ass the same. This was a place full of men with nothing to lose. There were nights I lay in bed and I could hear the sound of someone sharpening shanks. I prayed those knives weren’t meant for me.*  

- Page 208 (location ~ 3182-3197)    

*I couldn’t wait to get back to work. With the help of Todd I’d patched things up with Atlantic and they were ready to roll out the red carpet for my comeback album. They wouldn’t have to wait long for it. I couldn’t wait to get back to work. I’d gone through all the songs I’d written and I knew which ones I wanted for this album. They just needed beats. So I told Zay and Mike Will that I needed them as soon as I came home. They were ready to join me on house arrest and lock in. The New York Times wanted to come interview me. Fader magazine wanted me on their cover. XXL wanted me on their cover. The clothing brand Supreme wanted me for their fall collection and Harmony was going to shoot the video for it. I was nearly finished writing my memoir. Believe it or not, I even had a couple of book deal offers on the table. There was a lot to look forward to and I couldn’t wait to show every person who counted me out how mistaken they were. That my story wasn’t one to be pitied or laughed at but one to be inspired by. But I still had to prove that. Along with all the great things waiting for me out there was my biggest test. Keeping sober and working out and not letting this prison swallow me up had been the easy part. Soon I’d have to take my real stand.*  

- Page 212 (location ~ 3247-3256)  
