---
title: Eat Dirt (Dr. Josh Axe)
author: E
date: '2018-01-23'
summaryOn: true
summary: 'Hola, this is el summary'
categories: []
tags:
  - books
  - review
showDate: no
draft: yes
---


*“Ready?” She nodded. “Check this out.” I dropped the plastic balls into the fishing net. Miriam, expecting them to be caught by the net, gasped and looked startled as they fell through the bottom and bounced all over the wooden floor. “Didn’t expect that, huh?” I said. She shook her head. “Miriam,” I said, “I’m afraid that net is your gut.” I showed her how the strings at the bottom of the net had been severed, to illustrate what happens in leaky gut syndrome. When our guts are healthy, I explained, the intestines are only slightly permeable, like the thin mesh of an intact net, to allow minute quantities of water and nutrients through the gut’s thin barrier and into the bloodstream—a normal, necessary part of digestion, and an essential step in nourishing the body. “However, when the holes in the intestinal wall get too big, larger molecules, such as gluten and casein, and other foreign microbes can pass through and start wandering all over the body,” I explained, gesturing to the balls still rolling around the examining room floor. These larger items were never meant to hit the bloodstream, I said, and the body reacts to them as foreign bodies, causing systemic inflammation throughout the body. Any organ in the body can be affected when this happens. “In your case, it’s your thyroid, brain, and adrenal glands,” I said.*  

- Page 19 (location ~ 278-289)    

*I gave Miriam a healing protocol that started with foods high in probiotics—good bacteria that could tame her digestive problems—and prebiotics—foods with compatible nutrients that would feed those good bacteria. I asked her to make a smoothie using kefir and flaxseeds as the main ingredients to start off the morning, and to drink multiple cups of bone broth throughout the day, to help seal the lining of her gut. To help reduce her stress hormones, I urged her to find time for two or three fifteen-minute walks through the neighborhood and to take a healing bath with Epsom salts and lavender essential oil every night. After two weeks, Miriam came back for a follow-up. In that brief time, she’d lost five pounds and noticed that she had considerably more energy. Encouraged, she pledged to follow her health plan for ninety days, at which point we would redo her blood work.*  

- Page 20 (location ~ 293-299)    

*To keep us in good health, our gut relies on carefully maintaining a symbiotic relationship with trillions of microorganisms, the cells of which outnumber our human cells by a factor of ten to one.2 These microorganisms are a mix of good guys (mutualists), bad guys (pathogens), and neutral bystanders (commensals) that basically just go with the flow.3 Most experts believe the average healthy mix of microbes is about 85 percent positive/neutral and 15 percent negative, which creates a lively balance that keeps the immune system well trained and on its toes to defend against unhealthy viruses and other antigens.4 Every time we ingest something, the immune system in our gut must discern what is friend and what is foe, either welcoming or expelling nutrients, microorganisms, bacteria, and bugs. A healthy immune system remains quietly vigilant, like a burly bouncer, admitting the good and swiftly dispatching the bad. But when the gut gets mobbed by a relentless, unruly crowd—toxins in the environment, a nutrient-deficient diet, stress, medications, or other factors—the bouncer gets overwhelmed and our defenses are weakened. That’s when opportunistic bad bacteria make their move. These troublemakers take advantage of our impaired immunity and find their way in. Once they have their foothold, those bad bacteria can change the environment in the gut. They crowd out the good bacterial citizens that make their home there, take the place of probiotics that are responsible for vitamin production, burrow into mucus on the gut wall, and create holes in the intestinal lining that can change the pH balance of the gut and lead to yeast overgrowth. As a result, the outermost layer of the gut barrier, the epithelium, starts to weaken.*  

- Page 22 (location ~ 324-338)    

*Upon their initial visit, approximately 80 percent of my patients present with some level of leaky gut syndrome. They come to my clinic experiencing problems ranging from gallbladder issues to thyroid disease, psoriasis or eczema, migraine headaches, insulin resistance, and even stubborn weight gain. Many are amazed to learn that their condition may share the same origin as colitis, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), and Crohn’s disease. And they’re downright stunned when I tell them that some degree of leaky gut is present in every autoimmune disease, including lupus, multiple sclerosis (MS), type 1 diabetes, and even Parkinson’s and ALS. What I try not to mention is that they might have started down the same road to some of those more serious conditions had they not come to me when they did. Many mainstream medical groups eschew the term “leaky gut syndrome,” preferring the more technically specific term “increased intestinal permeability.” But that difference in terminology is quickly becoming irrelevant, as the field explodes with new information about our gut’s (and our microbiome’s) impact on human health and behavior.*  

- Page 23 (location ~ 350-358)    

*The overwhelming stress of modern life. Emotional stress exacts a very real toll on our gut health. Research has shown that stressful life experiences cause a decrease in probiotic diversity, which allows overgrowth of yeast in the gut. Stress also weakens the immune system over time, crippling our ability to fight off foreign invaders like bad bacteria and viruses, exacerbating any preexisting inflammation, and perpetuating leaky gut. Unrelenting germ warfare. Our culture’s addiction to oversanitizing our hands and our homes, treating every ailment under the sun with broad-spectrum antibiotics, and overprocessing our food has corrupted our innate microbial balance. We’ve killed off many strains of beneficial microbes that used to fine-tune our genes and strategically train our immune systems to handle pathogens, allergens, and other threatening factors in the environment. This disruption of our gut’s healthy coexistence with the phytobiome, nature’s vast universe of microbes, has had deadly consequences, including a rise in related chronic disease, autoimmune dysfunction, and antibiotic resistance. This year, at least two million people will become infected with antibiotic-resistant bacteria, and twenty-three thousand people will die as a result.*  

- Page 28 (location ~ 416-425)    

*As we’ve moved from agrarian to industrial to urban/suburban life, we’ve slowly distanced ourselves from many of the things that make us who we are. On a cell-for-cell basis, we are 90 percent microbial. We don’t just live on the earth—the earth lives in us. In order for our inner and outer ecosystems to peacefully coexist and support one another, we need to combine the best of modern life with those simple practices that kept us healthy and disease-free for many years. We need to start seeing those countless strains of bacteria, viruses, phages, parasites, and other microbes as old friends that we’re welcoming back into our guts, so they can start protecting us again. This “old friends” theory holds that if we can reclaim our microbial diversity through microexposures—small, repeated exposures to the “dirt,” such as bacteria, soil, dust, plant oils—we can reestablish the natural symbiotic relationship that we’ve always had with these microbes. Like nature’s immunizations, these microexposures keep a steady stream of good bugs coming into our system, interacting with our genes, and strengthening our immune system by reinforcing and teaching our native gut colonies how best to interact with the world around us.*  

- Page 29 (location ~ 441-450)    

*All we need to do to load up on our old friends and get more of these microexposures is easy, fun stuff we probably already love to do: Get back to eating seasonally and locally. Spend more time outdoors. Hug our dogs after they roll around in the leaves. Let our kids make mud pies and get their hands dirty on the playground. And to make sure our old friends feel safe and stick around, there are also a few things that we shouldn’t do: Freak out about germs. Blast everything with sanitizers. Take a pill for every single ache or pain. Simply put: we need to eat dirt. We can reverse many of our missteps, heal our gut, and recover from many of these diseases by making more basic and bacteria-rich choices in what we eat and how we live. And just by living that simpler way of life, with all of those daily microexposures to nature in all its dirty, microbial bounty, we will finally be able to repopulate the gut with those old friends that bring balance and help restore our radiant health.*  

- Page 30 (location ~ 450-458)    

*Even before birth, a baby is exposed to beneficial microbes (such as Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes) via the mother’s placenta.2 On the way out the mother’s birth canal, that tiny baby boy or girl is exposed to trillions more, which lay the foundation for the microbiome—and the immune system—that baby will develop over the coming years. Pioneering doctors have even begun to dab babies born via C-sections with their mothers’ vaginal secretions so they don’t miss out on this foundational bacterial bath. With his or her first meal, another influx of microbes will arrive—because breast milk also contains microbes, including the very bacteria that help us to digest our mother’s milk. What’s amazing is that these bugs that we are exposed to in the very first hours of life are the seed starters of our microbiome and will help to determine the course of our gut health for the rest of our lives. Now, if we continue to live our naturally dirty human lives—if we’re breast-fed and live in a house with a dog and enjoy the time-honored baby activity of putting random things in our mouths—these microbiota will grow and thrive. Responding to the various microorganisms we encounter, we continue to pick up bugs here and there, adding to the general diversity in our gut. The number of species grows from about 100 when we’re babies to about 1,000 when we’re adults. The composition changes based on who’s around, too, shifting from one that closely resembles Mom’s to one that reflects both mom and dad, your brothers and sisters, or whoever cares for you as a baby.3 But if we grow up in an extremely clean environment, without access to all that dirty goodness, we have fewer microexposures to both good and bad bugs, and our gut population will remain less diverse. And if we get sick somewhere along the way and need to be treated with an antibiotic (or several) during the first years of life, what diversity we have developed will be almost entirely wiped out—leaving the gut more vulnerable to virulent strains of bacteria, which can be incredibly crafty about survival.*  

- Page 36 (location ~ 538-554)    

*But it’s not always the good guys that have the most numbers—sometimes dangerous pathogens are the ones that rule the microbiome. This overpopulation of bad guys is a common side effect of frequent antibiotic use. The Centers for Disease Control has issued threat alerts for new antibiotic-resistant bugs that infect more than two million people a year.4 Four new antibiotic-resistant strains of salmonella have increased outbreaks in food-borne illnesses across the country.5 Antibiotic-resistant C. diff infection is by far the most devastating, with its painful diarrhea, fever, and kidney failure. According to the CDC, we have almost five hundred thousand diagnoses per year, with twenty-nine thousand of these dying within thirty days of diagnosis.6 Almost as many as die in car crashes7 or from gunshot wounds.*  

- Page 37 (location ~ 555-563)    

*People with fewer than 480,000 bacterial genes were termed “low gene count” (LGC) and the rest were considered “high gene count” (HGC). The richness of their microbiota differed by about 40 percent, and almost one in four of us would fall in the low gene count group. The researchers found this low level of bacterial richness corresponds with higher body weight and fat, insulin resistance, high cholesterol and triglycerides, and more pronounced inflammatory markers when compared to those with higher bacterial richness.9 They also showed evidence of greater oxidative stress in the body, and, not surprisingly, a higher likelihood of leaky gut.*  

- Page 37 (location ~ 567-573)    

*How did we get here? Our addiction to antibiotics is a huge driver—as is our exposure to antibacterial substances in everything from our food and water, to cosmetics, shampoo, conditioner, soap, sunscreen, makeup, and lotions, to our medicines—even our pet foods. But antibiotics are not the only danger. In our effort to sanitize our world, we have cut ourselves off from healthy bacteria in ways we are only just beginning to understand. When we put antibiotics in hand soap, we didn’t make our hands much cleaner—we just made the bacteria more resistant to antibiotics. But thanks to the dynamic field of microbiome research, we know that we can start to change our microbiome very quickly. A study of Japanese participants published in the journal Nature in 2010 found that the bacteria we eat and are exposed to develop a symbiotic relationship with us, the host.13 The Japanese test group had a diet high in foods from the ocean—fish and seaweed. The researchers found that when compared with participants who lived in North America, the Japanese participants had developed specific bacteria in their digestive tracts that allowed them to better digest sushi and seaweed. The lead researcher said that consuming foods with a unique set of bacteria is like giving your body a “new set of utensils” to work with.*  

- Page 39 (location ~ 591-601)    

*While we were talking, I also looked at the food journal that she’d brought to the office. I was immediately struck by how little fiber she ate. Her diet consisted of mostly highly refined grain products, including cereal, breads, crackers, granola, and pasta. I also noticed she had taken several rounds of prescription antibiotics while she was in college, which was about the time when her digestive problems began. I asked her about her chewing habits and, before she could answer, her husband jumped in: “Nonexistent! She pretty much swallows her food without chewing.” I suspected this detail was a big issue in her digestion. I stressed how important it was for her to chew her food thoroughly. “Ideally, we should chew thirty times per bite of food,” I said. I grinned as her mouth dropped open incredulously. At the end of our consult, I wrote Michelle a prescription for tests, including a stool test, which could reveal microbial imbalance, and an organic acids test specifically looking for nutrient deficiencies. When Michelle’s tests came back, sure enough, she was severely low in several B vitamins, including folate and B12, and also showed very low signs of vitamin D and zinc. The tests showed she had a major depletion in certain probiotic strains, including lactobacillus, and she had pathogenic yeast overgrowth. I knew immediately the loss of beneficial bacteria and her B vitamin deficiencies could be what was causing her MS-like neurological symptoms. “Michelle, I have good news,” I said. “I know how to help.” She began following a diet high in healthy fats, vegetables, and probiotic-rich foods. I also had her begin taking a vitamin B12 supplement, vitamin D3, probiotic supplements, zinc, and frankincense oil. After just twenty-one days, Michelle was out of her wheelchair. After ninety days, she practically strutted into my clinic and gave me a big hug. “I can’t believe it,” she said. “Every one of my symptoms—all the neurological stuff, my pain and fatigue, my digestive issues—have all just disappeared.” She said it felt like a miracle. As with all of my patients, I had first looked at Michelle’s digestive habits—they are usually a clear window into what’s happening in the body, and they give us great information for developing treatment protocols and nutrition plans. While many people think digestive details are unimportant, in my clinic, a full digestive history is the key to solving someone’s health mystery.*  

- Page 41 (location ~ 621-641)    

*That conversation I had with my mom—in which she disclosed for the first time that she basically had been constipated for her entire life—is proof that many people don’t discuss their digestive health with their doctors. We think it’s embarrassing or impolite, so we keep it a secret. Over time, we come to accept and normalize gut issues that are definitely not acceptable or normal. The truth is that the gut is far from being the least civilized aspect of our anatomy; in fact, it is among the most complex, with the farthest-reaching consequences for our overall health. Most of us have probably assumed for most of our lives that the digestive system has one simple job: to process the food we eat, extracting the nutrition and the energy we need to stay alive, and eliminating the harmful waste. But in truth, the process of digestion entails many discrete, highly intricate stages. If one of these stages gets disrupted, even a small shift could turn what should be a nourishing, fortifying process into something uncomfortable, mood altering, painful—and, in some extreme cases, harmful to the entire body. Healing the gut (or, better yet, preventing leaky gut entirely) starts with a quick understanding of how the digestive system works best. Once we know that, we’ll be better prepared to prevent it from breaking down and to restore the function of our digestive organs.*  

- Page 42 (location ~ 642-652)    

*With your first bite of food—or even your first whiff of or glance at food—saliva floods your mouth. That saliva contains the very first digestive enzyme your food encounters, which breaks down the carbohydrates as we chew. Most of us don’t take that much time to chew, but chewing your food thoroughly is actually a great way to help prevent leaky gut. Chewing sends the message ahead to the stomach (to get the acid ready) and the pancreas (to send along some other enzymes to the small intestines). Chewing also ensures we bite all the way through our food, so our digestive enzymes can access every morsel of it. By not chewing enough, not only do you miss out on nutrition still locked up in those particles, they’re also more likely to make it all the way to your colon undigested—giving you indigestion and gas, and providing a generous buffet for the harmful bacterial strains that hang out there.*  

- Page 43 (location ~ 658-664)    

*We tend to think of stomach acid as a bad thing, but the stomach’s natural hydrochloric acid helps us. This clear, pungent solution is so powerful that it can actually be corrosive to metals, but in our bodies, it destroys harmful bacteria and helps your stomach enzymes to break down proteins. If your stomach isn’t producing enough acid, you can experience acid reflux and be at a higher risk for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), one of the primary causes of leaky gut.*  

- Page 44 (location ~ 671-674)    

*The intestinal wall consumes about 40 percent of all of our body’s energy. It has many functions, but the two most important are to remain open to allow the body to absorb essential fluids and nutrients into the bloodstream, and to act as a barrier that shields the body against infections and toxins. The immune system in your gut is partly responsible for this job, and so is the gut wall itself. The gut wall has four layers: the serous layer, the muscular layer, the submucosa, and the mucosa. The outermost layer, the serous, is connective tissue, and the muscular layer is responsible for the movement that keeps food progressing through the GI tract. The mucosal and submucosal layers finish out the final layers. Together,*  

- Page 46 (location ~ 699-704)    

*The intestinal wall consumes about 40 percent of all of our body’s energy. It has many functions, but the two most important are to remain open to allow the body to absorb essential fluids and nutrients into the bloodstream, and to act as a barrier that shields the body against infections and toxins. The immune system in your gut is partly responsible for this job, and so is the gut wall itself. The gut wall has four layers: the serous layer, the muscular layer, the submucosa, and the mucosa. The outermost layer, the serous, is connective tissue, and the muscular layer is responsible for the movement that keeps food progressing through the GI tract. The mucosal and submucosal layers finish out the final layers. Together, these parts have been termed “the mucosal barrier”—the part of the gut that gets leaky.*  

- Page 46 (location ~ 699-704)    

*The mucosal barrier controls which nutrients get absorbed while preventing allergens, microbes, or other toxins from coming in. The barrier folds over itself throughout the GI tract, increasing the surface area for digestion and absorption into the tissues—but also greatly expanding the surface area that can develop leaks. Throughout the gut, a population of beneficial bacteria and other microbes tries to keep us at that 85 percent good/15 percent bad balance. The 85 percent neutral-to-good microbiota basically act as seat-fillers on the intestinal wall to prevent harmful microbes from taking up residence. The entire time, the mucosal barrier is helping to sort out good from bad, organizing just the right level of immune response to any bad guys. It’s kind of amazing to consider how an extremely thin layer of cells can do so many important jobs at once, managing the ideal balance between the microbes that live in your gut and the immune system that protects it, shielding your entire body from incoming pathogens while also nourishing it. When things are going well, the tight junctions in the gut wall make all the right judgment calls, letting in the friends and keeping out the foes—and we don’t even realize this screening process is constantly taking place. When an errant virus or pathogen does slip through the gates, our immune system snaps into action to neutralize the threat quickly. But when the tight junctions start breaking down consistently, that’s when leaky gut develops.*  

- Page 47 (location ~ 708-719)    

*For a long time, the causes of leaky gut were largely a mystery. But in recent decades, researchers have begun to find some answers. In 2000, Alessio Fasano, MD, at the University of Maryland made a discovery that may end up changing the trajectory of autoimmunity medicine and potentially even earn him a Nobel Prize one day. Fasano isolated the only known physiological substance that directly controls the tight junctions in the gut wall, a substance he called “zonulin.”15 Making this discovery has been compared with finding the root source, sometimes called the “smoking gun,” of leaky gut syndrome.16 Zonulin is a protein that signals the tight junctions to open and close—the only known substance in the body to do so. By controlling zonulin, scientists can open and close the tight junctions almost at will. At this point, we know of two things that can trigger the release of zonulin in the small intestine: exposure to bacteria and exposure to gluten.17*  

- Page 47 (location ~ 720-729)    

*For millennia, this zonulin response was an essential part of the body’s defense mechanism—it was a way of flushing out the bad bacteria we may encounter, such as salmonella. But our modern world has drastically increased the number of triggers for zonulin, leaving the gates of our gut wide open. What was once a very healthy (and fleeting) immune system response has morphed into a never-ending cascade, causing our bodies to become chronically inflamed and vulnerable. Many of the autoimmune conditions linked to leaky gut have a genetic component, yet researchers have determined that less than 10 percent of those with the genes for an autoimmune disease actually develop it. So why do some people with those genes get sick while others don’t? The answer, put simply, is our environment. That’s why the choices we make every day—the food we eat, the products we use, the stress levels in our lives, the pills we take—can make the difference between illness and health. These are all toxic microexposures that can lead to zonulin release. And these are all things, unlike genetics, that are usually within our control. The two most significant environmental factors when it comes to the release of zonulin are: The increase of gluten in our food supply: The hybridization of wheat, as well as its inclusion in almost all processed food products, has vastly increased our consumption of gluten, which creates conditions in the body that encourage a near-constant release of zonulin. The increase in antibiotic usage: The rise of antibiotic medications, hand sanitizers, chemical cleaners, medications, and other microbe killers has decimated our microbial diversity. Imbalances in our microbiome have led to increases in the sheer number of bacteria crowding into our small intestine, which continues to trigger zonulin’s gate-opening mechanism.*  

- Page 48 (location ~ 733-746)    

*A young mom walked into my clinic, holding the hand of her five-year-old son, Blake. The mother’s name was Jennifer, and I could tell she was both worried and exhausted. She had been to several other physicians and was searching for a cure to the rashes that covered Blake’s arms and face. “Let me take a look,” I said as I removed Blake’s shirt. Poor little guy. His upper torso was just as inflamed as his arms. His skin was swollen and red. The boy appeared to have a severe case of dermatitis, inflammation of the skin. Blake’s condition was so severe that his dermatitis was threatening to blister or develop a painful crust and flake off. “He’s itchy all the time,” Jennifer said. “We’ve seen other doctors, and they want to put him on steroids and antibiotics. That seems awfully drastic for a young boy.” A prescription-strength corticosteroid cream would be the go-to treatment of most doctors in this situation, an all-too-common example of how modern medicine treats the symptoms but overlooks the root cause of disease. After a thorough examination and discussion about Blake’s health history, I concluded that the boy’s body was experiencing inflammation caused by allergic reactions to the foods he ate and household toxins he was being exposed to. I told Blake’s mom that I thought he might have food sensitivities, most likely to gluten and casein, as well as allergic reactions to shampoo, the laundry detergent used to clean his clothes, maybe even the linen in his bedsheets. But to confirm my suspicions, we needed to do some testing.*  

- Page 50 (location ~ 755-767)    

*Our country is currently in the throes of an autoimmune storm. According to the Journal of the American Medical Association, the rate of chronic health conditions among U.S. children rose almost 15 percent between 1994 and 2006, with the largest growth among conditions believed to have an autoimmune link, such as obesity, asthma, and behavior and learning problems.1 The New York Times reported that blood test analyses prove young people are five times more likely to have celiac disease today than their peers in the 1950s.2 Type 1 diabetes among children has been skyrocketing around the world by an average of 3 to 4 percent per year—in other words, 30 to 40 percent per decade—while the average age of onset has gotten younger. Among Finnish children today, the incidence of type 1 diabetes is five times higher than it was in the 1950s.3 According to the CDC, food allergies among children increased 50 percent between 1997 and 2011.4, 5 If considered independently, any one of these reports could be waved off as a statistical anomaly. But the simultaneous rise in the prevalence of so many medical conditions points to a larger, systemic problem. So what unites all of them? Put simply, chronic systemic inflammation. All of these illnesses are believed to have an autoimmune basis. And they’re all linked to (if not caused by) leaky gut.*  

- Page 52 (location ~ 796-810)    

*The American Autoimmune Related Diseases Association estimates fifty million Americans currently have autoimmune conditions. When compared with cancer (which affects up to nine million) and heart disease (which affects up to twenty-two million), you can see that we need a major public awareness campaign around autoimmunity and leaky gut in this country.*  

- Page 54 (location ~ 813-816)    

*Autoimmune disease has long been something of a medical mystery. Researchers have struggled to understand why some people develop it and some don’t, and how it can cause such dramatic, ongoing, widespread effects in the body. Now, as the pieces slowly come together, more and more clinicians and researchers are coming around to the idea that leaky gut may provide a unifying theory for most autoimmune conditions. The theory goes like this: Before you develop leaky gut, your immune system has a very clear job. The innate immune system is your body’s first line of defense—it acts like a watchdog, reacting quickly to any immediate threat, but not always with 100 percent accuracy. Your innate immune system helps you recover from acute injuries such as a sprained ankle and acute infections such as the common cold. The adaptive immune system functions more like a bloodhound or a police dog; it remembers a scent (or in this case, a pathogen) from prior exposure, and is able to identify it quickly the next time around. This immune system is activated by exposure to certain microbes. When you come into contact with a virus, your adaptive immunity “remembers” the bug, and is able to figure it out quickly at the next exposure and deal with it in an efficient manner. This immune system is activated by immunizations. Oftentimes in today’s society, when we hear the word “immunization,” we immediately think “flu shot” or “vaccine”—we see them as the only way to be immunized. But natural immunizations have been around much longer—since we developed this adaptive immunity, in fact. When you’re exposed to beneficial microbes from local pollen, for example, your adaptive immunity “remembers” and is able to figure it out quickly at the next exposure. That’s why microexposures to pollen from local honey or walks in nature near your house help your immune system remember that particular kind of pollen, so it doesn’t overreact come allergy season. In the same way, when pathogens make their way through the tight junctions in the intestinal lining, the adaptive immune system creates antibodies to neutralize them, then develops a “memory” of those bad microbes to ensure a quick response if you are ever exposed to them again.*  

- Page 54 (location ~ 817-833)    

*Asthma About 40 percent of people with asthma also have leaky gut. Food sensitivities are known triggers for wheezing in some kids with asthma, which is why researchers believe leaky gut may increase their susceptibility to allergens in their environment.29*  

- Page 63 (location ~ 954-957)    

*Autism For a long time, even though many autistic kids had GI problems, no one was certain whether there was a cause-and-effect relationship between the two issues. Now a growing number of researchers believe that autism spectrum disorder might be better classified as an autoimmune disease, as many of the behaviors found in autism are believed to be the result of chronic inflammation that damages the blood-brain barrier, which allows particles to pass through, affecting the brain. When proteins like gluten and casein circulate in the body and reach the brain, they can cause neurological reactions in children such as poor focus, emotional outbursts, and slow cognitive development. A study published in the Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition found that kids with autism and their relatives were more likely to have leaky gut than adults and children without autism. But once they went on a gluten-free/casein-free diet, their gut barrier function returned to normal levels, and some symptoms of autism even improved.33*  

- Page 64 (location ~ 974-982)    

*Just one of our chromosomes, chromosome 16, holds the genes for IBD, lupus, type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis, and rheumatoid arthritis. All of these diseases have proven, documented links to zonulin and leaky gut. Chromosome 16 also holds the genes for autism, ALS, and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)—conditions with suspected links to zonulin and leaky gut. Also on the same chromosome are genes for breast cancer, several kinds of leukemia and lymphoma, and prostate cancer.34 As of now, there’s no definitive answer about whether or not they’re connected with leaky gut, but who knows where we’ll be in just a few years? As researchers delve further into the connections between autoimmune conditions and leaky gut, let’s hope they find some answers for cancer. In the meantime, these intriguing research connections can inspire us to take good care of the gut, so we can potentially help stop this autoimmune crisis in its tracks.*  

- Page 65 (location ~ 986-993)    

*Different autoimmune conditions require different tests for a definitive diagnosis, but a good start is determining if you have leaky gut. For definitive advanced testing, here are four lab tests to consider, all of which can be done at home:    a Lactulose Breath Test (LBT), which is excellent for diagnosing small intestine bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) and leaky gut    an Organic Acids Test (OAT), which reveals vitamin and mineral deficiencies    an IgG (Immunoglobulin G) test, which checks for food allergies in the body    a stool test, which tells you the balance of good and bad microorganisms in the body In the resource guide at the end of the book, you will find information on how you can order these tests. While you are waiting for these results, I would not waste any time—go ahead and get started on the Eat Dirt program and specific gut type protocols in part 3. Addressing the root causes of your leaky gut now could prevent you from progressing into full-blown autoimmune disease.*  

- Page 67 (location ~ 1020-1030)    

*I thought of that moment when I read an incredible study in 2015, about how the microbes found in New York City public parks, the Gowanus Canal, and subway cars were harmless—and possibly even could be healthy. A team of DNA-swabbing researchers, led by Weill Cornell Medical College geneticist Chris Mason, identified nearly six hundred different species of bacteria and microbes on New York City subways alone, from samples taken on handrails, seat backs, floors, and closing doors. Almost half of all DNA present on the subways’ surfaces matched no known organism. One subway station that was flooded during Hurricane Sandy still had the microbial profile of a marine environment.*  

- Page 68 (location ~ 1037-1042)    

*For the past century, in so many facets of our lives, we’ve been trying to blast bacteria. The goal was understandable: bugs bad, clean good. But in our misguided attempt to keep ourselves and our families safe, we have exposed ourselves to a growing health crisis. We have oversanitized our daily lives, and our bodies, relying on disinfectants and sanitizers, spending most of our time indoors, and rushing to get prescriptions for antibiotics any time we (or our kids) feel sick. Now we know that living in too sterile of an environment makes our bodies more vulnerable to disease, not less. In the past, scientists called this the “hygiene hypothesis”—the idea that limiting our exposure to bacteria, especially in childhood, makes us more likely to have a suppressed immune system. Now we know that what’s most threatening is our modern lack of “old friends,” the commensal and mutualist bacteria and other microbes in our microbiome that help fine-tune our immune responses to our environment. By living*  

- Page 69 (location ~ 1051-1058)    

*For the past century, in so many facets of our lives, we’ve been trying to blast bacteria. The goal was understandable: bugs bad, clean good. But in our misguided attempt to keep ourselves and our families safe, we have exposed ourselves to a growing health crisis. We have oversanitized our daily lives, and our bodies, relying on disinfectants and sanitizers, spending most of our time indoors, and rushing to get prescriptions for antibiotics any time we (or our kids) feel sick. Now we know that living in too sterile of an environment makes our bodies more vulnerable to disease, not less. In the past, scientists called this the “hygiene hypothesis”—the idea that limiting our exposure to bacteria, especially in childhood, makes us more likely to have a suppressed immune system. Now we know that what’s most threatening is our modern lack of “old friends,” the commensal and mutualist bacteria and other microbes in our microbiome that help fine-tune our immune responses to our environment.*  

- Page 69 (location ~ 1051-1057)    

*Our misguided attempts to dominate nature—rather than live within it—have left us in an extremely compromised position. Thankfully, we are coming full circle. We’re starting to recognize how important it is to embrace our elemental existence. Because we are literally made of mud. If you were to take away the water in our bodies, you’d be left with mostly dirt, made of sixty of the most abundant elements in the Earth’s crust.5 This isn’t such a new idea, really—it’s an age-old one. The idea that humans are made from mud is foundational to many of the world’s leading religions, including Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. In Christianity and Judaism, Genesis 2:7 (NLT) says, “Then the Lord God formed the man from the dust of the ground. He breathed the breath of life into the man’s nostrils, and the man became a living person.” We are an amalgam of the Earth’s elements: oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, calcium, and phosphorus, with traces of potassium, sulfur, sodium, iron, and magnesium. All of these elements come together to make a living, breathing human being. And as much as we’d like to believe we’ve grown much more sophisticated since the earliest days of humans, the truth is that our genome is basically the same as it was when we first appeared on Earth—while the microbiome continues to evolve every single day.*  

- Page 70 (location ~ 1072-1082)    

*I’ve had a dog since I was a kid, and I credit many of those walks, and much of that paw dirt, with giving me the cumulative microexposures that have helped my immune system avoid allergies. In fact, medical research has proven that having a cat or a dog as a kid cuts our risk of allergies in half. I’ve become such a believer in the health benefits of getting my hands dirty that I’m constantly looking for ways to touch, feel, and yes, even eat dirt. My favorite way is through produce: when I purchase a fresh bunch of organically grown carrots at the farmer’s market, I know I’m going to be far better off simply rinsing my carrots under running water instead of scrubbing them with a brush and some kind of produce wash, because the surface area of every carrot contains beneficial microbes. When I do this, I can take in an average five hundred milligrams of old-fashioned dirt each day, the same amount the average child consumes when playing outdoors. Five hundred milligrams, essentially the size of an average supplement capsule, may not sound like much—but there are probably more*  

- Page 73 (location ~ 1105-1113)    

*I’ve had a dog since I was a kid, and I credit many of those walks, and much of that paw dirt, with giving me the cumulative microexposures that have helped my immune system avoid allergies. In fact, medical research has proven that having a cat or a dog as a kid cuts our risk of allergies in half. I’ve become such a believer in the health benefits of getting my hands dirty that I’m constantly looking for ways to touch, feel, and yes, even eat dirt. My favorite way is through produce: when I purchase a fresh bunch of organically grown carrots at the farmer’s market, I know I’m going to be far better off simply rinsing my carrots under running water instead of scrubbing them with a brush and some kind of produce wash, because the surface area of every carrot contains beneficial microbes. When I do this, I can take in an average five hundred milligrams of old-fashioned dirt each day, the same amount the average child consumes when playing outdoors. Five hundred milligrams, essentially the size of an average supplement capsule, may not sound like much—but there are probably more beneficial microbes in that small amount of dirt than there are people living on Earth today.*  

- Page 73 (location ~ 1105-1114)    

*In the span of human history, 150 years isn’t really all that much time—so when you think about it, our obsession with germs is a relatively modern phenomenon. The idea that germs around us make us sick is the reason we wash our hands after we cough, reach for our hand sanitizer after shaking hands at a business function, clean our kitchens with bleach, or throw away the stray carrot that hits the linoleum floor. It’s why health-care workers practice good hygiene by washing their hands frequently and wearing disposable gloves, and surgeons use sterilized medical equipment. And while some of these measures are absolutely vital to our health—I don’t think any of us wants a surgeon with dirty hands or a contaminated scalpel performing an operation on us!—our paranoia about germs has gotten out of hand. And it’s not hurting the germs—it’s hurting us.*  

- Page 74 (location ~ 1126-1132)    

*Take dishwashing, for example: conventional wisdom says that we’re always better off washing our glasses, plates, forks, and knives in a dishwashing machine because they get cleaner that way, because the dishes and silverware are “sterilized” by the piping-hot water. But doing so also deprives our bodies of a chance to be exposed to more bacteria, which can bolster the immune system. According to a 2015 study of over one thousand Swedish children, parents who mostly washed their dishes by hand—rather than in the dishwasher—raised children who were significantly less likely to develop eczema and somewhat less likely to develop allergic asthma and hay fever.7 The Swedish researchers found that eating off of sanitized plates made the immune system more likely to misfire and overreact in a way that led to autoimmune conditions. In contrast, the kids who grew up without dishwashers were exposed to tiny particles of dirt and bacteria, getting repeated microdoses of immunity modulators with every meal.*  

- Page 74 (location ~ 1133-1140)    

*Until Pasteur’s time, people weren’t all that afraid of dirt. Think about the farmer who got hungry while tilling his fields. He’d yank an apple off the tree, brush off the skin, and chomp away. Naturally, he was eating a little “dirt”—pollen, soil-based organisms, and other microbes—with every bite. In fact, those minute microbes actually helped to break down the polysaccharides (sugar) in the apple, making it easier to digest. That dirt on the apple also had antioxidant and preservation properties. In the era before refrigeration, it was common to store food by burying it in the ground or storing it in a dirt cellar, which helped to keep bad bacteria and yeast at bay because of the lower temperature and microbes in the soil that help preserve the food. Most of those daily microexposures to dirt came to an end when our agrarian lifestyle tapered off during the first half of the twentieth century. People began to move from the country to the city, and while they were exposed to plenty of dirt in the city, it wasn’t the beneficial, organic dirt of country living. At the turn of the century, waste management systems were in their infancy; in overcrowded cities, raw sewage flowed through the streets; people drank contaminated water; food standards were unregulated, and eating tainted or spoiled food was not uncommon; and contagious and deadly diseases spread rapidly. It makes sense that we became fearful of bugs and wanted to pasteurize our food and sanitize our homes. But today, after decades of fighting germs, the pendulum has swung too far in the opposite direction.*  

- Page 75 (location ~ 1148-1160)    

*The idea of eating dirt has also been around a long time, dating from Hippocrates more than twenty-five hundred years ago. You name the civilized culture in past millennia, and you’ll find a record of those people consciously including a bit of dirt in their diets. In cultures around the world, pregnant women often crave dirt or clay—and some actually eat it. In sub-Saharan Africa, pregnant women eat dirt during the first, second, or third trimesters, often several times a day. The dirt has a soothing effect on the stomachs of those fighting morning sickness as well as providing vitamins and minerals that their changing bodies crave. Certain types of soil, especially clay, are high in iron and sulfur, which pregnant women naturally long for because their bodies are demanding more hemoglobin—the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen to the cells—to produce blood for a developing baby.*  

- Page 77 (location ~ 1172-1179)    

*More specifically, pregnant women sometimes crave clay, which—as any fourth-grader could tell you—is different from regular dirt because of its denser nature and tiny soil particles. Clay has unique microbes that are excellent for the gut but also bind toxins and help pull them out of the body. One of the most popular and healthiest clays to eat is bentonite clay, which is composed of volcanic ash. When I have patients struggling with loose stools or diarrhea, I always suggest they take a teaspoonful of bentonite clay in a glass of water twice every day until they experience relief. I’ll never forget our Caribbean honeymoon in St. Lucia several years ago for a variety of reasons, but one memory that stands out is when Chelsea and I signed up to take a mud bath together at a nearby volcano where hot, muddy water flowed out of the side of a mountain. We were told by the locals to submerge ourselves in the mud and then let it dry and stay on our skin for thirty minutes before washing off. We followed their advice and covered ourselves from head to toe, then relaxed and gave the mud time to dry. Afterward, we not only felt rejuvenated but our skin was positively glowing from the generous dose of healthy microbes in Caribbean mud.*  

- Page 78 (location ~ 1183-1192)    

*Kids also aren’t getting dirty like they used to. Part of that comes from our collective obsession with sanitizing hand gels, antibiotic soaps, and germ-killing wipes. But very few kids are allowed to roam neighborhoods or play in the woods anymore. Instead of playing hide-and-seek in the bushes or digging foxholes for “army” games, playtime for most elementary school–age kids now consists of sitting inside and staring at a variety of screens. Contrast that with our grandparents’ generation, when many children and teens had to complete chores around the farm before and after school: gathering eggs, shoveling the compost pile, weeding the garden, feeding animals. Our parents’ generation got their hands dirty as kids, too—who hasn’t heard stories about their dad or uncle mowing lawns or raking leaves to make some pocket money? But as technology has improved our lives and outsourcing household chores has become easier and cheaper, we’ve lost contact with these basic routines. I remain nostalgic for a simpler time—a more humane pace, living in tune with the rhythms of the sun and the seasons, breathing in the smells (and microbes) of organic soil every day, being connected with our neighbors, animals, families, and the land. That way of life worked well with so many aspects of our core biological and social needs—and, not coincidentally, also encouraged our microbiome to thrive.*  

- Page 79 (location ~ 1202-1211)    

*   Eat probiotic-rich foods like kefir, yogurt, and sauerkraut: One of the reasons many people today are lactose intolerant (or have an allergy to dairy products) is that pasteurization kills off the beneficial probiotics and enzymes. According to several published medical studies, when someone with lactose intolerance consumes a dairy product that is raw or fermented—which is also higher in probiotics or enzymes—symptoms of lactose intolerance can diminish. Kefir is especially beneficial, and a study in the Journal of the American Dietetic Association showed that kefir improves lactose digestion and tolerance in adults with lactose malabsorption.*  

- Page 80 (location ~ 1221-1225)    

*An independent case study conducted at a medical clinic in Denver reported that 94 percent of patients were completely free from allergy symptoms once treated with an oral regimen of pollen. These gradual and natural immunizations from the microbes in the honey and pollen take up residence in your gut and help modulate your immune system to adjust to the local environment. Honey also provides an excellent source of prebiotics, to nourish the gut bugs as it educates them. Eat local honey throughout the year, and when allergy season arrives, you’ll already have had a healthy exposure and your immune system will be less likely to overreact to the extra pollen in the air.*  

- Page 81 (location ~ 1231-1236)    

*   Swim in the ocean: You’ve probably heard or experienced for yourself how a cut seems to heal quickly after a dip in the ocean. Part of that is due to the salt content of the water, but the good microbes and bacteriophages present in salt water also have therapeutic merit. A 2013 study in Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism found that those who took baths in minerals salts from the Dead Sea had a decrease in skin inflammation, rheumatoid arthritis, and psoriasis.*  

- Page 82 (location ~ 1244-1247)    

*   Get grounded: Just the simple act of putting your bare feet on the ground can affect your health in several surprising ways. When you stroll barefoot on grass, dirt paths, shoreline sand, or even concrete sidewalks after a rainstorm, the soles of your bare feet come into direct contact with the surface of the Earth, creating the opportunity for billions of bacteria and other beneficial microbes to catch a ride. Researchers have become so fascinated with the health benefits of walking barefoot that it’s given rise to a whole new field of study on the practice, now being called “earthing” or “grounding.” A study in the Journal of Environmental and Public Health found that the Earth’s negative charges can literally “ground” us, similar to a grounding wire of an electrical tower. The connection between our skin and the Earth’s surface may help to stabilize our internal bioelectrical*  

- Page 82 (location ~ 1248-1255)    

*   Get grounded: Just the simple act of putting your bare feet on the ground can affect your health in several surprising ways. When you stroll barefoot on grass, dirt paths, shoreline sand, or even concrete sidewalks after a rainstorm, the soles of your bare feet come into direct contact with the surface of the Earth, creating the opportunity for billions of bacteria and other beneficial microbes to catch a ride. Researchers have become so fascinated with the health benefits of walking barefoot that it’s given rise to a whole new field of study on the practice, now being called “earthing” or “grounding.” A study in the Journal of Environmental and Public Health found that the Earth’s negative charges can literally “ground” us, similar to a grounding wire of an electrical tower. The connection between our skin and the Earth’s surface may help to stabilize our internal bioelectrical environment in a way that regulates the normal functioning of our body systems.*  

- Page 82 (location ~ 1248-1255)    

*   Get grounded: Just the simple act of putting your bare feet on the ground can affect your health in several surprising ways. When you stroll barefoot on grass, dirt paths, shoreline sand, or even concrete sidewalks after a rainstorm, the soles of your bare feet come into direct contact with the surface of the Earth, creating the opportunity for billions of bacteria and other beneficial microbes to catch a ride. Researchers have become so fascinated with the health benefits of walking barefoot that it’s given rise to a whole new field of study on the practice, now being called “earthing” or “grounding.” A study in the Journal of Environmental and Public Health found that the Earth’s negative charges can literally “ground” us, similar to a grounding wire of an electrical tower. The connection between our skin and the Earth’s surface may help to stabilize our internal bioelectrical environment in a way that regulates the normal functioning of our body systems. Researchers believe this exchange of electrical charge may factor into setting the biological clock, regulating circadian rhythms, and balancing cortisol levels. A 2006 study published in the Journal of European Biology and Bioelectromagnetics found that after participants engaged in earthing, their cortisol levels reverted to normal levels and rhythms, rising in the morning and falling in the late afternoon.*  

- Page 82 (location ~ 1248-1258)    

*Perhaps one of the best dirt-based supplements is shilajit—pronounced shee-lay-jit—which comes from dense, nutrient- and mineral-rich soil high in the Himalayan mountains bordering India and Tibet. Shilajit contains at least eighty-five minerals, including two of my favorites—humic acid and fulvic acid—that are commonly used as a soil supplement in agriculture. Fulvic acid and humic acid help the body transport minerals through thick cell walls and prolong cell life.*  

- Page 84 (location ~ 1286-1289)    

*In the first thirty days of following this protocol, Carolyn lost eighteen pounds. With her digestive*  

- Page 85 (location ~ 1297-1297)    

*A fifty-eight-year-old grandmother, Carolyn was fifty pounds overweight. Around the time of her first visit, her self-esteem was at an all-time low. She also suffered from memory problems, insomnia, depression, and fatigue. Throughout our conversation, it was clear to me that her adrenal and thyroid glands were desperately in need of support, which I advised she get from a diet centered on organic vegetables and fruit as well as fermented foods. I advised her to stop eating gluten and processed sugar, which wasn’t going to be easy for her, as she ate a lot of processed carbohydrates. But Carolyn was so determined to regain her health that she willingly gave them up. My other major recommendation was to take a nutritional supplement with an SBO probiotic. In the first thirty days of following this protocol, Carolyn lost eighteen pounds. With her digestive system receiving all of this supportive reinforcement, her body had the resources it needed to reshape itself and regain a healthier form. Very soon, Carolyn had lost seven inches off her waist and nine inches off her hips. She had more energy than ever before, and was finally motivated to exercise. She told me she was enjoying life more fully than she had in years. The changes experienced by Carolyn are almost identical to those I’ve seen in many other patients who follow a similar regimen. Once they focus their attention on eating dirt—literally and metaphorically, in what they eat and how they live—health issues that have plagued them for years often disappear, sometimes in less than thirty days. In America, we’ve come to expect that it will take a lot longer to solve these health issues, but that only goes to show you that when you’re intentional about increasing beneficial microbes in your gut, your gut takes care of you. And taking nutritional supplements with soil-based organisms could be one of the most important aspects of “eating dirt.”*  

- Page 85 (location ~ 1291-1305)    

*We’ve spent the past century acting like we have the upper hand in nature. It’s time to recognize that this isn’t a fight we want to win. We humans are vastly outnumbered by our microbial friends. We need to call a truce, to lay down our weapons, and to recognize that resistance is futile—we can’t defeat our bugs, and we shouldn’t want to. The more we strive to live harmoniously on the Earth, in the dirt, and with our microbiome as good fellow citizens, the more our good old friends, those trillions of beneficial bacteria, will be all too happy to help heal our guts and make us whole again. What do you say—are you ready? It’s time for us to eat dirt!*  

- Page 86 (location ~ 1309-1313)    

*Spector was intrigued by a study published in the medical journal Diabetes in which lab mice given an intense high-fat, high-sugar diet experienced weight gain, diabetes, inflammation, and increased intestinal permeability (or, as we know it, leaky gut).1 The mice’s microbiota, devastated by the horrible diet, had undergone a lasting change to their ecosystem. Spector wondered how the human body would react under the same circumstances, but making a group of people sick on purpose is hardly ethical. Instead, he tracked down a University of Pittsburgh study that was illuminating.2 The study had observed the diets of two different groups of people: twenty African Americans and twenty rural black South Africans. Before the study, the African American participants had been eating a typical American diet—a lot of fried foods and very few fruits and vegetables—while the South Africans had always consumed a traditional local diet high in beans and vegetables. For two weeks, the groups swapped diets, with the South Africans eating burgers, fried chicken, and fried potatoes. Spector found that after a diet high in fat and animal protein but low in dietary fiber, the South Africans experienced remarkable changes in their biomarkers that indicated colon cancer risk. The blood work showed that their health had taken a serious decline—in just two weeks! The African American group, however, experienced positive changes. After two weeks of consuming corn porridge served with vegetables, beans, or a meat stew, their biomarkers for colon cancer were greatly reduced.*  

- Page 87 (location ~ 1334-1347)    

*Wanting to investigate further, Spector made a deal with his son, Tom: he would buy him McDonald’s meals every day for ten days, if he could study Tom’s microbiome afterward. For ten days at every meal, Tom ate a Big Mac or Chicken McNuggets, plus the obligatory fries, all washed down with a Coke. He collected stool samples before, during, and after his fast food regimen. He became weak, and friends told him he’d developed a strange gray color. “I really felt unwell,” he said. “When I finally finished, I rushed to the shops to get some salad and fruit.”3 Teams from Cornell University and the British Gut Project tested Tom’s microbiome, and the results were startling: his community of gut microbes had been devastated. Tom lost fourteen hundred species of microorganisms—nearly 40 percent of his total!—in just ten days. His gut didn’t recover right away, either; it was months before beneficial microbes repopulated his gut. But it’s not just the obvious junk food offenders that can have such a serious impact on your gut health. Many of the packaged foods on supermarket shelves labeled as “healthy” lay waste to our microbes, with various ingredients and additives directly contributing to leaky gut. A recent article in Autoimmunity Reviews drew a direct line between industrial food additives, leaky gut, and autoimmunity, citing added sugar and salt, emulsifiers such as polysorbate 80 or lecithin (commonly found in ice cream, chewing gum, and even some vitamins), and gluten as big offenders.*  

- Page 88 (location ~ 1347-1359)    

*even microwave popcorn is as safe as you might assume: a statement released by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration announced that microwave popcorn contains perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), a synthetic chemical found in nonstick pans that’s been linked to cancer and hormone disruption.7 Very few people are aware of how the foods they eat affect their gut, or create a constant tug-of-war between harmful bacteria and good bacteria inside their digestive tracts. We need to become more mindful that the foods of the modern world—even many of the ones we’ve long considered to be “healthy”—are making us sick.*  

- Page 90 (location ~ 1367-1372)    

*One of the swimmers I worked with was Cullen Jones, a fifty-meter and hundred-meter freestyle sprinter who was coming back from a shoulder injury he suffered during a weight-lifting exercise. We were chatting poolside one day when I asked him what his training diet was like. Cullen reflected a moment. “Well,” he said, “the staff nutritionist has me drinking Nesquik chocolate milk after every workout.” Chocolate milk? I would later learn this is quite common, but I pretended not to be shocked as I urged him to continue telling me about his diet. He said that he usually ate peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and drank chocolate milk—a favorite among many of the athletes—all day long at the training facility. When he was on his own, he grabbed a meal at McDonald’s or Burger King. Okay, one step at a time, I thought. The first thing I needed to do was wean Cullen off chocolate milk, a mixture of homogenized, pasteurized milk with heaping teaspoons of white sugar and refined cocoa. Since Cullen wasn’t progressing like everyone had hoped, the team nutritionist gave me permission to try something new. I met again with Cullen and said I’d like him to start consuming a superfood smoothie for breakfast using coconut milk, blueberries, and an organic protein powder. He readily agreed to make the switch.*  

- Page 90 (location ~ 1377-1387)    

*The pasteurization process that most conventional dairy products undergo destroys essential enzymes and probiotics, as well as alters vital amino acids. Nearly all commercial milk is also homogenized, a process that oxidizes fats and creates free radicals. Free radicals are unstable oxygen molecules that are known to weaken the immune system and result in intestinal inflammation, leading to leaky gut. According to a study published in the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, a single glass of pasteurized milk can contain up to twenty different chemicals. We know that growth hormones and antibiotics are regularly fed to cows, but researchers at the University of Jaen in Spain also found traces of numerous drugs such as niflumic acid, mefenamic acid, flunixin, diclofenac, ketoprofen, and ibuprofen, which are commonly used as painkillers for the animals.*  

- Page 93 (location ~ 1412-1418)    

*The pasteurization process that most conventional dairy products undergo destroys essential enzymes and probiotics, as well as alters vital amino acids. Nearly all commercial milk is also homogenized, a process that oxidizes fats and creates free radicals. Free radicals are unstable oxygen molecules that are known to weaken the immune system and result in intestinal inflammation, leading to leaky gut. According to a study published in the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, a single glass of pasteurized milk can contain up to twenty different chemicals. We know that growth hormones and antibiotics are regularly fed to cows, but researchers at the University of Jaen in Spain also found traces of numerous drugs such as niflumic acid, mefenamic acid, flunixin, diclofenac, ketoprofen, and ibuprofen, which are commonly used as painkillers for the animals.8 Everything these cows get injected with goes straight into their milk. This is important because the oxidized fats present in homogenized milk often pass through the gut wall, carrying the hormones, steroids, drugs, and other compounds into the bloodstream and off to the rest of the body.*  

- Page 93 (location ~ 1412-1421)    

*I rarely consume cow’s milk because even organic versions in this country tend to contain a protein called A1 beta-casein. The result of a relatively recent genetic mutation, this protein is more common among the Holstein cows of American and some European industrial dairies, and can be more inflammatory to the body than gluten. A1 beta-casein releases beta-casomorphin-7, an opioid with a structure similar to that of morphine that’s been linked to autism and schizophrenia. This protein may also create a shortage of antioxidants in the brain, which is another risk factor for autism.*  

- Page 93 (location ~ 1421-1425)    

*Most Americans grow up consuming only cow’s milk, which has a mild taste, while goat’s milk has a strong, distinctive taste. Even if you think you don’t like goat’s milk, I urge you to give it another try. Especially goat’s milk kefir, which is incredibly healthy for the gut and offers numerous benefits for the body. Goat’s milk is lower in lactose, or milk sugars, than cow’s milk; when fermented, it may not contain any lactose at all. The fatty acids in goat’s milk are easily burned for energy, so they are not stored as fat. These fatty acids help lower cholesterol levels and have been shown to be beneficial for conditions such as cardiovascular disease and intestinal disorders.*  

- Page 94 (location ~ 1432-1436)    

*L-glutamine is one of the best supplements for leaky gut. Synthesized by the body from glutamic acid or glutamate, L-glutamine is a fuel source for the cells in the small intestine. L-glutamine also helps moderate the body’s IgA immune response, an antibody associated with food sensitivities and allergies. A study of twenty postoperative patients in the Lancet found that supplementing with L-glutamine helped maintain the health and length of intestinal villi as well as preserve the mucosal lining and prevent further worsening of leaky gut.10 If the body is unable to produce enough, it needs to get it directly from your diet. While L-glutamine can be found in animal proteins such as meats and dairy, beans, raw spinach, parsley, and red cabbage, it is known as a conditionally essential amino acid, because it is used by the body in large amounts. That’s why L-glutamine supplements are so critical for people with leaky gut. If you are looking to improve digestive health and heal leaky gut I recommend you take 5 grams of glutamine powder twice daily with meals.*  

- Page 96 (location ~ 1460-1469)    

*Phytic acid is considered an “antinutrient”—a naturally occurring substance found in plant foods that blocks the absorption or proper functioning of other nutrients in the body. This mineral binder prevents our bodies from absorbing key bone-building nutrients such as calcium, magnesium, iron, copper, and zinc, which creates nutrient deficiencies and reduces the digestibility of starches, proteins, and fats. It can be found on the bran of all grains as well as the outer coating of seeds and nuts, and is an enzyme inhibitor. When grains are unsprouted and unfermented, the phytic acid can irritate the intestines and cause leaky gut. Grains also contain amylopectin, which has been called a “super carbohydrate” for its ability to increase blood sugar faster than other carbohydrates. (In this case, “super” is not a good thing.) The molecular structure of amylopectin causes this starch to be more easily digested than other complex sugars, which raises blood sugar levels faster than you can say, “Sure, I’ll have a sandwich.” In a study from the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, participants were given a diet that was 70 percent amylopectin or 70 percent amylose, a different but healthier “resistant” starch that isn’t as quickly digested as amylopectin. Because it takes longer to break down, amylose is fermented by bacteria in the large intestine similar to how some types of fiber are broken down—a process that limits spikes in blood sugar levels, lowers cholesterol, and feeds the beneficial bacteria in the colon.12 Foods rich in amylose tend to have a low glycemic index: fruits, vegetables, salads, and organic whole-grain products. In contrast, foods with amylopectin have a high glycemic index: white breads, starchy potatoes, and sugary desserts. The study found that those on the amylopectin diet had high glucose and insulin responses after a meal, which led to fat storage on the body, specifically in the abdominal area, otherwise known as belly fat. Stick with the amylose!*  

- Page 97 (location ~ 1475-1490)    

*The phrase “you are what you eat” is a fallacy. As I always tell my patients, “you are what you digest.” And digestive enzymes are key to both better digestion and nutrient absorption. If you have any type of digestive disease, such as acid reflux, gas, bloating, leaky gut, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, diverticulitis, malabsorption, diarrhea, or constipation, then digestive enzymes can help. Digestive enzymes can take stress off the stomach, pancreas, liver, gallbladder, and small intestine by helping break down difficult-to-digest proteins, starches, and fats. A study at the University of Salerno, Italy, found that digestive enzymes significantly improved bloating, flatulence, and abdominal pain in patients with IBS.13 Taking one or two capsules at the beginning of each meal can ensure that foods are fully digested, decreasing the chance that partially digested food particles and proteins are damaging your gut wall or worse—sneaking through your tight junctions and into your bloodstream.*  

- Page 98 (location ~ 1495-1503)    

*Gluten is also added as a filler and binding agent to many processed food products, including:    artificial coffee creamer    bouillon cubes    candy    chewing gum    snack chips    cold cuts    fish sticks    flavored teas    gravies    ground spices    hot dogs    imitation seafood    ketchup    mayonnaise    rice mixes    salad dressing    soy sauce    tomato sauces    vegetable cooking sprays You won’t find “gluten” on any of these food ingredient labels, but you will read head-scratching descriptions like:    dextrin, malt, or maltodextrin    gelatinized starch    hydrolyzed plant protein (HPP)    hydrolyzed vegetable protein (HVP)    modified food starch    monosodium glutamate (the infamous MSG)    natural flavorings    rice malt or rice syrup    whey protein concentrate    whey sodium caseinate*  

- Page 99 (location ~ 1517-1546)    

*Any time you’re baking with coconut flour or almond flour, you’re going to use some form of oil, right? But the oil of choice in many homes is canola oil or other vegetable oils, which are horrible for your health for two main reasons: 1) over 90 percent of canola oil and other vegetable oils, including corn oil and soybean oil, are produced from genetically modified plants; 2) vegetable oils are used in partially hydrogenated oils. Partially hydrogenated oils are liquid fats that have been injected with hydrogen gas at high temperatures and under high pressure to make them solid at room temperature. This hydrogenation process produces a terrifying health villain: trans fats. Trans fats interfere with normal cell metabolism, and research shows that trans fats are hazardous for your heart because they lower the good HDL cholesterol, increase the bad LDL cholesterol, and increase triglycerides, a type of fat found in your blood. We need triglycerides for energy, but too many raise the risk of cardiovascular disease.*  

- Page 102 (location ~ 1555-1563)    

*Extra virgin coconut oil is one of the healthiest and most versatile unprocessed oils in the world and remains stable when heated so you can cook with it. Today there are more than fifteen hundred studies proving the health benefits of coconut oil, including balancing hormones, eliminating candida, improving digestion and supporting metabolism, balancing blood lipids and sugar, and improving memory for those with Alzheimer’s disease, among many others. The vast majority (more than 85 percent) of the fats in coconut oil are medium-chain triglycerides. The medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) found in coconuts are easy for the body to burn as fuel for energy and have anticandida properties, in addition to other important traits.*  

- Page 104 (location ~ 1585-1591)    

*Finally, I want to mention flaxseed oil, which has anti-inflammatory properties and contains high levels of essential fatty acids (EFAs). Flaxseed oil can be used in smoothies or salad dressings but is consumed more often as a nutritional supplement or used as a healing balm than as a cooking oil. I often recommend it for those suffering from constipation, as flaxseed oil helps to lubricate the colon and soothe an inflamed gut. A review of studies by University of Maryland researchers showed that flaxseed oil and other omega-3 fatty acids may also be helpful in treating high cholesterol, heart disease, and cellular function.*  

- Page 105 (location ~ 1607-1611)    

*According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the average American consumes 66 pounds of added sugar every year.21 In comparison, we consume just one pound per year of mankind’s oldest sweetener—honey.22 Coming from the nectar of flowers through the efforts of busy bees toiling in the sunshine, honey contains a staggering number of antioxidants, minerals (including iron, zinc, potassium, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and selenium), and vitamins (vitamin B6, thiamin, riboflavin, pathothenic acid, and niacin). Honey can also help to neutralize free radical activity in the body and act as a prebiotic to help feed and support our beneficial gut bacteria. One tablespoon of honey contains sixty-four calories, which is a little more than a tablespoon of refined sugar, but packs a nutritional bonanza in comparison. But there’s honey . . . and there’s raw honey. Commercial honey is often heavily processed, so much so that 76 percent of honey products sold in U.S. grocery stores contains zero pollen and are devoid of other nutrients, making it really just another form of processed sugar.23 The bee pollen in raw honey, however, contains natural microbes that help in modulating the immune response in the body. In addition, as we talked about in chapter 4, raw honey that is native to your region is best because it helps teach your gut bacteria how to build up an immune defense to local allergens. Consuming small, regular quantities of raw honey from your own county or region is a great delivery mechanism of microexposures of local dirt, helping you get more of those “old friends” back into your digestive system.*  

- Page 107 (location ~ 1626-1640)    

*While FDA studies have “ruled out” the cancer risk for nonnutritive sweeteners like aspartame, I have to wonder about the twenty-four-ounces-a-day average for drinkers of diet soda. It’s been my experience that those who drink diet soda develop near-addiction responses, with some people drinking as many as six to twelve cans a day. What’s all that chemical-laden slush doing to their gut and immune system? In 2015, PepsiCo—the makers of Diet Pepsi, Caffeine Free Diet Pepsi, and Wild Cherry Diet Pepsi—announced that the company had stopped sweetening their diet sodas with aspartame, the most problematic of the artificial sweeteners, and replaced this artificial sweetener with sucralose, better known as Splenda. Unfortunately, that isn’t much of an improvement. A study published in the journal Environmental Toxicology found sucralose has a more detrimental effect on gut bacteria than other artificial sweeteners because 65 to 95 percent of sucralose makes it all the way through the digestive tract and is excreted through feces unchanged.28 Essentially, the body cannot digest sucralose, so this artificial sweetener travels through the GI tract causing damage as it goes—killing probiotics and harming the intestinal wall. Researchers at Duke University Medical Center also discovered that Splenda not only significantly reduces beneficial bacteria in the gut; this artificial sweetener also increases your fecal pH, which decreases the amount of nutrients you can absorb.*  

- Page 109 (location ~ 1663-1674)    

*If you’re expecting artificial sweeteners to help you lose weight, think again. Purdue University researchers learned that sugar substitutes can interfere with the body’s natural ability to count calories based on a food’s sweetness. The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA), which included more than six thousand individuals, found that daily consumption of diet soda increased the risk for increased waist circumference and increased the chance of developing type 2 diabetes by 67 percent.30 So, what do you do when you order a tea in a restaurant but are determined not to reach for the packets of pure cane sugar or an artificial sweetener? Reach into your purse or pocket for a two-ounce bottle or powder packets of stevia, a sugar substitute derived from the stevia plant that grows in Paraguay and Brazil, where the indigenous people have used leaves from the stevia bush to add sweetness to their food for centuries. Stevia has no calories and is two hundred times sweeter than sugar in the same concentration—and it doesn’t raise blood sugar levels. Stevia, however, does have a bitter aftertaste for some, so this sweetener isn’t the perfect solution. Brands like SweetLeaf Stevia tend to be less bitter and have a more desirable aftertaste.*  

- Page 111 (location ~ 1696-1706)    

*staying healthy involves good sanitation, not oversanitation. One animal study published in Science in 2012 demonstrated the harm that can result from living in a too-sterile environment. Researchers observed two groups of mice: the first group was bred with “germ-free” immune systems that lacked gut bacteria; the second group was given normal, healthy exposure to good and bad bacteria. When they were tested, the germ-free mice were found to have much higher levels of inflammation in their colon and lungs than the mice with normal germ exposure (who had healthy immune responses). The germ-free mice had also developed symptoms similar to ulcerative colitis and asthma. But the good news is, once the germ-free mice were exposed to normal amounts of bacteria two weeks after birth, their immune system response balanced out, and the animals healed from their inflammatory conditions.*  

- Page 114 (location ~ 1743-1749)    

*When it comes to washing hands, I recommend warm water and essential oils like tea tree oil that have mild antimicrobial qualities. A lot of antibacterial soaps on the market today contain harsh chemicals like triclosan, which kill off the good bacteria as well as the bad. Triclosan (which is found in soaps, shampoos, sanitizers, and many other personal care products) has been shown to damage the liver and kidneys and cause cancer. I strongly suggest skipping the antibacterial hand washes and washing your hands with warm water and antimicrobial essential oils like orange, melaleuca, or rosemary oil. If you must buy hand soap, look for all-natural brands (such as Dr. Bonner’s Pure Castile Soaps) that are free of chemical fragrances and additives such as retinyl acetate.*  

- Page 117 (location ~ 1788-1793)    

*One ammonia-oxidizing bacterium (AOB), called Nitrosomonas eutropha, is often found in dirt and untreated water, but was once also present in our skin bacteria, before we started washing it away. Scientists believe this bacteria actually kept us clean and fresh-smelling, boosted our immune system, and tamped down inflammation, all by feeding on the ammonia in our sweat and converting it into nitrite and nitric oxide.3 While Americans no longer have AOB on their skin, scientists have found it on the skin of the Yanomami people. The market is just starting to pick up on the potential for this alternative method of probiotic microexposures. (An interesting brand that’s just been introduced is the Mother Dirt’s AO+ line of soap, shampoo, and mist, which features AOB that’s claimed to help keep you clean without washing.) If you can’t bring yourself to go whole hog with an AOB-based product, I suggest you let your own body do the work of repopulating your skin by showering only on days you work out and just using water without soap and shampoo a few days a week. If you don’t work out daily, then showering every other day is sufficient.*  

- Page 118 (location ~ 1801-1810)    

*Oils Through the Ages For more than five thousand years, cultures around the world have extracted organic compounds from plants for their use in healing and beauty rituals. Egyptians in the days of Pharaoh made extensive use of essential oils in medicine and burial practices. When King Tut’s tomb was opened in 1923, archaeologists discovered fifty alabaster jars filled with essential oils. Cleopatra, considered the most beautiful woman in the world, traveled from Egypt to the Dead Sea, where the waters naturally contained clay and minerals that were absorbed by her skin—the world’s first clay mask! Cleopatra used essential oils like rose, frankincense, cypress, neroli, and myrrh, and was said to be “clouded in a scent of mystery.” In the Bible, essential oils were used by Moses and other biblical figures to anoint kings; priests also used essential oils for healing. In fact, in the Book of Exodus, Moses was given a specific formula directly by God: Then the Lord said to Moses, “Take the following fine spices: 500 shekels [around 12 pounds] of liquid myrrh, half as much [around six pounds] of fragrant cinnamon, 250 shekels [around six pounds] of fragrant calamus, 500 shekels [around 12 pounds] of cassia—all according to the sanctuary shekel—and a hin [around a gallon] of olive oil. Make these into a sacred anointing oil, a fragrant blend, the work of a perfumer. It will be the sacred anointing oil.”*  

- Page 119 (location ~ 1813-1827)    

*Following the birth of Christ, the biblical story says, wise men from the Far East gave the infant king gifts of gold to honor his royalty, frankincense as a perfume, and myrrh for anointing oil. Frankincense oil was often rubbed on children to reduce swelling because of its anti-inflammatory qualities as well as immune protection. Myrrh oil was known as a natural antiseptic and could have been put on the infant Jesus’ umbilical cord area as well as been applied to his mother, Mary, since myrrh oil helps heal tissues and balance hormones. Essential oils are referenced 264 times in the Bible, and 33 different types of oils are mentioned. The father of medicine himself, the physician Hippocrates, utilized aromatherapy in Ancient Greece to enhance massage techniques. And practitioners of medicine in China and India have also employed herbal remedies and embraced essential oils for millennia. Clearly, all major civilizations throughout history have relied upon essential oils’ healing properties. But not only has history proven the benefits of essential oils, science has as well. Over 10,000 studies have been published on the therapeutic value of essential oils. Indeed, over 1,200 alone have looked at the properties of peppermint oil, a fact that’s of particular interest because of peppermint’s traditional use (now scientifically validated) as a tonic to soothe and heal the gut.*  

- Page 120 (location ~ 1830-1840)    

*When we lived in an agrarian society, we had plenty of opportunities to get our hands dirty and come into contact with these helpful organisms. In 1900, half of the U.S. labor force were farmers. In just 115 years, that number has shrunk to just 2 percent—and 60 percent of today’s hardworking farmers farm only part time. Very few of us get dirty working the soil or being around a dusty farming operation. Since most people are living and working in dirt-free urban settings or suburbs, it’s vital to make sure we actively seek out contact with SBOs. Unfortunately, most of our food supply does not contain dietary SBOs, with the exception of food from farmer’s markets, where we can purchase fresh fruits and vegetables still coated with soil from the ground. This is where nutritional supplementation containing soil-based organisms steps into the gap.*  

- Page 123 (location ~ 1880-1886)    

*from the Bacillus family. The first is Bacillus subtilis, an endospore probiotic that is heat resistant.*  

- Page 124 (location ~ 1890-1891)    

*You can find hundreds of different species of SBOs in nature, but the best strains come from the Bacillus family. The first is Bacillus subtilis, an endospore probiotic that is heat resistant. Bacillus subtilis elicits a potent immune response, supports the healing of the gut lining, and suppresses the growth of bad bacteria like salmonella and other pathogens. This bacterium doesn’t normally live in the human gastrointestinal tract, nor is it found in common foods, so you have to take it in supplement form. The other strain is Bacillus coagulans, also an endospore probiotic that is heat resistant. This strain improves nutrient absorption. Upon activation of spore formation in the acidic environment of the stomach, Bacillus coagulans can germinate and proliferate in the intestines and produce lactic acid, critical factors in the effectiveness of this probiotic. Bacillus coagulans has been shown to reduce inflammation and symptoms of arthritis, according to a study in the journal BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine.5 If and when you seek out a nutritional supplement with SBOs, be sure to look for Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus coagulans on the product label.*  

- Page 124 (location ~ 1889-1899)    

*Medicinal Mushrooms In forested areas, mycelia—the parts of the mushroom that grow below the ground rather than the fruiting body on top—have been shown to detoxify the earth by breaking down plant and animal debris and turning that material into rich topsoil. Many are unaware that the most beneficial part of the mushroom is the mycelia. When consumed by humans, mushroom mycelia offer many wonderful benefits that include:    helping balance microbes in the microbiome    supplying beneficial microbes with prebiotics, to keep them well fed    effectively boosting the immune system    detoxifying chemicals and heavy metals    inhibiting pathological immune functions in autoimmune disorders    reducing histamine release, which is associated with autoimmune disorders    destroying tumors and cancer cells    helping fight viruses and candida    acting as an adaptogen to balance cortisol levels and other stress hormones Many types of mushroom mycelia exist in nature, but five of the most powerful are cordyceps, reishi, shiitake, lion’s mane, and turkey tail. All of these mushrooms have a history of medicinal use in ancient Chinese medicine that dates back thousands of years, and have immune-enhancing properties currently being studied around the world for their promise in fighting cancer.*  

- Page 124 (location ~ 1899-1916)    

*Blue-green algae has long been one of the most nutrient-dense foods on the planet—and this includes its prebiotic power to feed the beneficial microbes in the gut. The Aztecs harvested blue-green algae from Lake Texcoco in central Mexico, and African tribespeople living on Lake Chad in west-central Africa discovered the health advantages of a dried-out form of blue-green algae centuries ago. These days, Hawaii is a premier source for blue-green algae. One popular type of blue-green algae is spirulina, which is known for its high concentration of iron, B12, calcium, niacin, potassium, magnesium, beta-carotene, and several B vitamins. NASA astronauts used this nutrient as a nutritional supplement on space missions. I’ve found spirulina to be an awesome addition to smoothies because of its intense flavor and powerful nutrition profile. To date, there are nearly twelve hundred peer-reviewed scientific articles evaluating blue-green algae and spirulina, with seventy peer-reviewed articles examining spirulina’s ability to affect cancer cells. According to the University of Maryland Medical Center, animal and test-tube studies suggest that “spirulina increases the production of antibodies, infection-fighting proteins, and other cells that improve immunity and help fight off infection and chronic illness such as cancer.”13 The Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center notes that blue-green algae may protect against DNA mutations and increase levels of NK cells in humans.*  

- Page 129 (location ~ 1970-1981)    

*Phage therapy is the use of beneficial viruses to combat pathogenic bacteria. This form of therapy was popular in the first half of the twentieth century, but fell into disfavor after the discovery of antibiotics in the 1940s. With the rise of antibiotic-resistant bacteria suddenly grabbing attention in the medical world, the therapeutic potential of phages is getting a second look. In 2014, the American Society of Microbiology (ASM) listed phage therapy as one of seven ways we can begin to combat antibiotic resistance.*  

- Page 131 (location ~ 2004-2008)    

*All bone broths—beef, chicken, fish, lamb, and more—are staples in the traditional diets of every culture. That’s because bone broths are nutrient-dense, easy to digest, and rich in flavor and boost healing. Bone broth or stock was a way our ancestors made use of every part of an animal. Bones and marrow, skin and feet, tendons and ligaments can be boiled and then simmered over a period of days. This simmering causes the bones and ligaments to release healing compounds like collagen, proline, glycine, and glutamine, compounds shown to improve rheumatoid arthritis, other joint conditions, and inflammatory bowel disease—all linked directly to leaky gut.25 One animal study published in Pathophysiology found that proline-containing peptides found in bone broth restored the mucosal lining in animals with leaky gut.26*  

- Page 136 (location ~ 2076-2083)    

*While the dietary collagens found in all bone broths are beneficial, some are more beneficial than others. Bovine collagen is highest in type 1 and 3 collagen, beneficial for skin, hair, and nails. Chicken collagen includes type 2, found in our cartilage, and is particularly beneficial for the gut and joints. Fish collagen is perhaps the most beneficial of all, because it helps your body produce its own collagen and efficiently raises your levels of type 1 collagen, found in 90 percent of the tissues in the body. When you make your bone broth, be sure to cook it with meat and fat as well as bone, to dilute any heavy metals (such as lead) that may be concentrated in the bone, and use organic, free-range animals whenever possible. To help “heal and seal” the intestinal lining in leaky gut, I usually recommend people drink 1 to 2 cups of bone broth a day and take a collagen supplement with all three types (1, 2, and 3) included. Collagen powders can also be a great way to sneak protein into a gut-healing smoothie.*  

- Page 137 (location ~ 2090-2097)    

*Researchers at Penn State found that spinach lost 47 percent of its folate and carotenoids after only four days at room temperature or eight days in a refrigerator. And a University of California, Davis, study showed that vegetables can lose between 15 and 77 percent of their vitamin C content within a week after being picked. Dozens of other nutrients are quickly lost during transport and storage of fresh fruits and vegetables, because they are so sensitive to air, light, and heat. There’s a reason why we call produce perishable. Like just about every American, I believed that once I put a bag of organic spinach in the drawer of my refrigerator, it should be fine for at least a week, maybe longer. But if that bag of organic spinach took five days to reach a distribution center and a couple of days to get stocked at a grocery store, and spent another day or two in the cold case before I picked it up and dropped it into my shopping cart, how many vital nutrients were lost forever?*  

- Page 141 (location ~ 2149-2156)    

*When the U.S. Senate launched an investigation into the decreasing quality of our soil, this is what it reported: “The alarming fact is that foods—fruits, vegetables and grains—now being raised on millions of acres of land that no longer contain enough of certain needed nutrients, are starving us—no matter how much we eat of them.”1 That report was published in 1936. By 1999, the U.S. Department of Agriculture found that forty-three vegetables and fruits showed “reliable declines” in protein, calcium, phosphorus, iron, vitamin B2, and vitamin C in the previous fifty years. Average calcium levels in twelve fresh vegetables (such as broccoli, cabbage, carrots, onions, watercress, and kale) dropped 27 percent. Vitamin C levels had dropped 30 percent.2, 3 The difference is so dramatic that we would have to eat eight oranges to get the same amount of vitamin C as our grandparents got from eating just one.*  

- Page 141 (location ~ 2158-2167)    

*All over the world, minerals and nutrients in our soil have been lost because of these farming practices. Some estimate that only forty-eight years of nutrient-rich topsoil remains. In some ways, minerals are more essential to our health than vitamins. Our bodies can’t manufacture minerals, so we must get them from our diet. The minerals in food are supplied by the soil where the produce was grown. Healthy soil also helps to supply specific vitamins, natural antibiotics, amino acids, and phytochemicals vital to our health. Some of our worst chronic illnesses stem from nutritional deficiencies: heart disease, stroke, diabetes, obesity, bone loss, high blood pressure, dementia, macular degeneration, and leaky gut. If we fail to change our farming practices now, history has shown us that the results will negatively affect generations to come. Historically, entire civilizations have died off when their topsoil was depleted of nutrients.6 Those San Marzano tomatoes we cooked with in Florence are considered by chefs to be among the best tomatoes in the world. Sweet and luscious, with a thicker skin and fewer seeds, the tomatoes in Italy tasted much better than commercially grown tomatoes in the United States. Whether grown in the States or in neighboring Mexico, our conventional tomatoes are picked from the vine while they are still green and then allowed to ripen on their way to market. Plant geneticists have manipulated present-day tomatoes to have specific characteristics: they must turn red by the time they reach the store, they must remain firm, and their skin has to be durable enough to travel long distances. Taste? Nutrition? Not part of the criteria.*  

- Page 142 (location ~ 2174-2186)    

*It’s certainly easier to shop for organic foods than ever before. Farmer’s markets are always my first choice, but you can certainly do quite well shopping at natural foods grocers like Whole Foods, Sprouts, and Trader Joe’s. Even traditional grocers like Kroger, Publix, and Safeway are selling organic produce, and the world’s largest retailer, Walmart, now stocks organic dairy and produce, as well. But what about cost? As my friend Jordan Rubin likes to say, “You can pay the farmer now or the pharmacy later.” Yes, organic food costs more—about 25 percent more—but I can’t think of a better investment for good health. If organic foods’ superior taste isn’t enough to get you to change your shopping habits, then consider how much better—in terms of nutrient value—organic foods are for the body. In a study published in the Journal of Applied Nutrition, organically and conventionally grown apples, pears, potatoes, wheat, and sweet corn were compared and analyzed for their mineral content over a two-year period.12 The organically grown foods were:    63 percent higher in calcium    73 percent higher in iron    118 percent higher in magnesium    178 percent higher in molybdenum    91 percent higher in phosphorus    125 percent higher in potassium    60 percent higher in zinc Shopping for and consuming organic foods provides one of the surest paths away from developing leaky gut. After making the switch to organic, it’s time to think about the power of fermented foods.*  

- Page 146 (location ~ 2234-2251)    

*farmer’s market every week and drink it with a bit of prebiotic-rich raw honey and sprouted flax*  

- Page 149 (location ~ 2279-2279)    

*The process of fermentation is actually very simple. Take this example of how cabbage is turned into a probiotic powerhouse: sauerkraut. Sauerkraut is made by a process called facto-fermentation. Beneficial bacteria live on the surface of all living plants, fruits, and vegetables. Lactobacillus lives on the surface of cabbage. (You may recognize the name as it’s also commonly found in yogurt.) In order to make sauerkraut, you simply put shredded cabbage, water, and salt in a glass mason jar with the lid slightly turned so a small amount of air can escape for three to ten days at room temperature. The lactobacillus bacteria feed off the natural sugar found inside the cabbage and turn it into lactic acid, which acts as a natural preservative and is what gives fermented foods like yogurt, kefir, and sauerkraut their sour taste. Pretty simple, right? Cabbage, water, sea salt, and a glass jar is all you need. Not only does the fermentation process allow the cabbage to keep for long periods of time, but it also results in higher levels of vitamins C and B than the original cabbage, as well as greater numbers of live lactobacilli and other beneficial microbes. During the fermentation process, bacteria and yeasts break down proteins into amino acids, fats into fatty acids, and complex sugars into simple sugars such as glucose. Additional beneficial compounds are created during this process, including*  

- Page 148 (location ~ 2261-2271)    

*The process of fermentation is actually very simple. Take this example of how cabbage is turned into a probiotic powerhouse: sauerkraut. Sauerkraut is made by a process called facto-fermentation. Beneficial bacteria live on the surface of all living plants, fruits, and vegetables. Lactobacillus lives on the surface of cabbage. (You may recognize the name as it’s also commonly found in yogurt.) In order to make sauerkraut, you simply put shredded cabbage, water, and salt in a glass mason jar with the lid slightly turned so a small amount of air can escape for three to ten days at room temperature. The lactobacillus bacteria feed off the natural sugar found inside the cabbage and turn it into lactic acid, which acts as a natural preservative and is what gives fermented foods like yogurt, kefir, and sauerkraut their sour taste. Pretty simple, right? Cabbage, water, sea salt, and a glass jar is all you need. Not only does the fermentation process allow the cabbage to keep for long periods of time, but it also results in higher levels of vitamins C and B than the original cabbage, as well as greater numbers of live lactobacilli and other beneficial microbes. During the fermentation process, bacteria and yeasts break down proteins into amino acids, fats into fatty acids, and complex sugars into simple sugars such as glucose. Additional beneficial compounds are created during this process, including other probiotics that help feed the gut lining and maintain a healthy bacterial balance.*  

- Page 148 (location ~ 2261-2272)    

*There’s no doubt that kefir is one of the most microbe-rich foods in the world, with high microbial diversity of ten to thirty-four different strains of bacteria in each serving. Similar to yogurt but with a more liquid consistency, kefir is usually sold in ready-to-drink quart bottles at farmer’s markets and natural foods stores. The tart-tasting, effervescent beverage contains high levels of naturally occurring bacteria and yeast, which break down the lactose in milk (making it suitable for those who are lactose intolerant). One of the many reasons many people today are lactose intolerant is that the modern practice of pasteurization kills off the beneficial bacteria and enzymes, but a study in the Journal of the American Dietetic Association showed that kefir improves lactose digestion and tolerance in adults with lactose malabsorption.13 Kefir is a great base ingredient to build smoothies around: just add eight ounces of kefir into a blender, an assortment of frozen berries or fruits, a bit of raw honey, and sprouted flax meal, and blend for a delicious, satisfying smoothie. (Note: Exercise caution when purchasing commercial brands of kefir, which are often made from cow’s milk, tend to be overly sweetened, and can contain excessive additives. Be sure to check the ingredients list.)*  

- Page 149 (location ~ 2281-2291)    

*Kombucha has many people curious. The murky-looking trendy beverage with an exotic name is a combination of black or green tea, a dash of organic sugar or evaporated cane juice, and a fungus culture known as a “kombucha mushroom”—a pancake-shaped mass of bacteria and yeast that often appears as a mysterious blob floating in a bottle of kombucha. Chinese in origin and tart as a Granny Smith apple, kombucha is loaded with a long list of beneficial bacteria, amino acids, B vitamins, and enzymes that deliver a cidery flavor with a kick of fizziness. If you’ve never tried kombucha, you’re in for a bit of a surprise. The acidic tang takes a bit of getting used to, but don’t let that stop you from giving this fermented beverage a try. Many claims have been made about kombucha, but its primary health benefits include digestive support, increased energy, and liver detoxification.*  

- Page 153 (location ~ 2343-2349)    

*Phytic acid is an example of an antinutrient that naturally exists in grains, seeds, nuts, beans, and legumes. Other antinutrients include:    polyphenols, which inhibit the healthy digestion of copper, iron, zinc, and vitamin B1, along with enzymes, proteins, and starches found in plant foods.    enzyme inhibitors, which prevent adequate digestion and upset the gastrointestinal tract. Enzyme inhibitors not only cause digestive problems, but they can also contribute to allergic reactions and mental illness.    lectins and saponins, which irritate the gastrointestinal tract, leading to immune responses like joint pain and rashes. Antinutrients have protective properties that help plants ward off pests and insects. When predators ingest antinutrients in plant materials, they don’t feel so good. It stands to reason, then, that when humans eat grains, seeds, and nuts with antinutrients, our GI response interferes with our ability to digest the vitamins and minerals within the plants. To neutralize the effects of antinutrients like phytic acid, we can ferment seeds and grains through sprouting, which involves soaking grains, nuts, seeds, legumes, and beans and then letting them dry so that they become easier to digest and our bodies can access their full nutritional profile. According to a medical study published in Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, when comparing the seeds in sprouted grains to unsprouted grain seeds, the unsprouted grains had “lower protein content, deficiency of certain essential amino acids, lower protein and starch availabilities, and the presence of certain anti-nutrients.” Sprouting grains also makes them easier to digest for people with gluten sensitivities. In a study published in the Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, researchers sprouted wheat kernels for up to one week while analyzing them at different stages to observe the changes in gluten concentrations and nutrient levels.16 They found that sprouting the wheat decreased the gluten proteins substantially, while increasing dietary fiber by 50 percent.*  

- Page 155 (location ~ 2366-2385)    

*A survey by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health analyzed 2,983 chemicals in personal care and cleaning products and determined that:18    over 800 were toxic    nearly 800 caused acute toxicity (triggering a rapid reaction)    314 caused a biological mutation in the living system of the body    376 caused skin and eye irritation    148 could cause tumors in laboratory animals    218 caused reproductive complications Toxin overload is one of the main causes of leaky gut. When the gut gets inflamed over time, the tight junctions degrade and leave you more vulnerable to food particles, environmental chemicals, and bacterial waste leaking from your digestive tract and traveling into your body.*  

- Page 157 (location ~ 2407-2417)    

*plant or tree. A steaming process distills the oil, separating it from water-based compounds. Even*  

- Page 161 (location ~ 2455-2455)    

*Essential oils are extracted directly from the bark, flowers, fruit, leaves, seeds, or roots of a plant or tree. A steaming process distills the oil, separating it from water-based compounds. Even one drop of one of these highly concentrated oils can have a powerful health benefit. The reason I say highly concentrated is that it takes 150 pounds of lavender flowers to make only sixteen ounces of lavender essential oil and sixty-five pounds of red rose petals to make just a single fifteen-milliliter bottle of rose essential oil—which can sell for up to a thousand dollars! Think about those incredible ratios when you purchase a small vial of essential oil. Essential oils have very small molecules that easily penetrate your cells. These molecules differ from fatty oils made from vegetables and nuts, which are much larger and cannot penetrate your cells, so they aren’t therapeutic in the same manner. When you apply vegetable oils to the skin, they can clog your pores. Essential oils, on the other hand, are transdermal and will soak right into your skin. Check out the Eat Dirt recipes on page 245 for step-by-step instructions on how to make everything from toothpaste to toilet cleaner using essential oils. Once you learn how easy and pleasurable—and inexpensive!—nontoxic home and body care products made with essential oils can be, you’ll be hooked.*  

- Page 161 (location ~ 2454-2464)    

*In fact, more than 75 percent of all physician visits are for stress-related ailments—many of them related to the gut. This is no coincidence. The mind-body connection is not a philosophy; it is a biological fact. The microbes and nerve cells in the gut communicate with each other and the brain constantly via what’s known as the gut-brain-microbiota axis.1 At the center of this axis is the vagus nerve, a thick bundle of nerves that runs along the spinal column, connecting the hundred million neurons in the gut’s enteric nervous system to the base of the brain at the medulla.2 This connection is at the root of that “butterflies in the stomach” feeling we get when we’re excited—or the “kick to the gut” we feel when we’re stressed. In addition to this direct gut-brain connection, our millions of enteric nerves—collectively known as our so-called second brain—have their own receptors that react to the presence of certain gut bacteria and metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids. This second brain is responsible for producing 90 percent of the body’s serotonin (the neurotransmitter of contentment that’s known to soothe anxiety and depression), as well as more than 50 percent of our dopamine (the neurotransmitter associated with excitement, learning, and reward).*  

- Page 163 (location ~ 2499-2509)    

*When the microbial balance is off in our gut, pathogenic microbes can interfere with the production of these neurotransmitters in many ways, including gobbling up needed nutrients that support mood, and secreting toxic chemicals that interfere with hormone and vitamin synthesis. When we’re not able to produce optimal levels of these neurotransmitters, we are more likely to experience heightened stress and a lifelong tendency toward mental health challenges such as chronic anger, addiction, anxiety, depression, and more. These mechanisms operate in a constant feedback loop—the fewer good microbes you have, the fewer positive neurotransmitters, and the more pronounced your response to stress becomes. The more stress hormones you produce, the greater your inflammation, which further irritates your stomach lining, increasing your likelihood of developing leaky gut—which leads to increased levels of pathogenic bacteria and yeast overgrowth. A 2014 study published in the journal Gut found that emotional or psychological stress greatly increased the risk of leaky gut and inflammatory bowel disease.3 Even short bouts of stress can trigger or worsen leaky gut. In one study, researchers monitored participants’ stress response to a stressful event (in this case, public speaking) by measuring their cortisol levels, and then assessed their gut health. They found that the people who released the most cortisol*  

- Page 164 (location ~ 2509-2520)    

*When the microbial balance is off in our gut, pathogenic microbes can interfere with the production of these neurotransmitters in many ways, including gobbling up needed nutrients that support mood, and secreting toxic chemicals that interfere with hormone and vitamin synthesis. When we’re not able to produce optimal levels of these neurotransmitters, we are more likely to experience heightened stress and a lifelong tendency toward mental health challenges such as chronic anger, addiction, anxiety, depression, and more. These mechanisms operate in a constant feedback loop—the fewer good microbes you have, the fewer positive neurotransmitters, and the more pronounced your response to stress becomes. The more stress hormones you produce, the greater your inflammation, which further irritates your stomach lining, increasing your likelihood of developing leaky gut—which leads to increased levels of pathogenic bacteria and yeast overgrowth. A 2014 study published in the journal Gut found that emotional or psychological stress greatly increased the risk of leaky gut and inflammatory bowel disease.3 Even short bouts of stress can trigger or worsen leaky gut. In one study, researchers monitored participants’ stress response to a stressful event (in this case, public speaking) by measuring their cortisol levels, and then assessed their gut health. They found that the people who released the most cortisol in reaction to the stress also experienced the greatest change in their intestinal permeability.*  

- Page 164 (location ~ 2509-2521)    

*   Cut back on work hours until she eventually shifted to a part-time position with twenty hours a week    Took Sundays off    Exercised daily for thirty minutes    Received massage therapy    Took long walks in nature    Watched funny movies with my dad Giving herself permission to decompress was a big mental hurdle for my mom. But once she committed to this self-care, to grounding herself in nature and spending*  

- Page 165 (location ~ 2528-2535)    

*For many of us today, “fight or flight” is not an emergency survival mechanism but our default operating mode. Perhaps we think we perform better under pressure or thrive on deadlines, so we become literal adrenaline junkies, addicted to the motivating zoom of norepinephrine and the resulting release of dopamine. Soon our bodies adapt to invoke the same physiological response that our predecessors once needed to literally fight (or flee) for their lives for smaller and less dangerous triggers. Stress hormones flood our bodies when we’re sitting in traffic, waiting in a long line, stuck in a meeting, or running late to pick up the kids from school. The net result is that our bodies are constantly prepared for battle—and yet we rarely dispel those stress hormones or take restorative actions to calm ourselves down and regain our balance. We don’t soothe ourselves or take the time to rest after a stressful event. Instead, we move on to the next stressful activity,*  

- Page 167 (location ~ 2550-2557)    

*For many of us today, “fight or flight” is not an emergency survival mechanism but our default operating mode. Perhaps we think we perform better under pressure or thrive on deadlines, so we become literal adrenaline junkies, addicted to the motivating zoom of norepinephrine and the resulting release of dopamine. Soon our bodies adapt to invoke the same physiological response that our predecessors once needed to literally fight (or flee) for their lives for smaller and less dangerous triggers. Stress hormones flood our bodies when we’re sitting in traffic, waiting in a long line, stuck in a meeting, or running late to pick up the kids from school. The net result is that our bodies are constantly prepared for battle—and yet we rarely dispel those stress hormones or take restorative actions to calm ourselves down and regain our balance. We don’t soothe ourselves or take the time to rest after a stressful event. Instead, we move on to the next stressful activity, and our bodies get the message that we’re in a constant, low-grade state of emergency.*  

- Page 167 (location ~ 2550-2558)    

*let’s say we did have a placid childhood, with happy bugs in our guts—are we safe? Well, we’re certainly less prone to chronic stress—but we could experience a shift in our nervous system response at any moment in our lives. In addition to all of these stress-induced chemical responses—which can affect gut permeability—our use of antibiotics or any other gut-damaging factor we’ve discussed can tilt the microbial balance in our guts toward a dysfunctional stress response. Don’t forget—that vagus nerve is ever vigilant, allowing the brain to interact and communicate directly with our microbes constantly. As we saw with those people who feared delivering a speech, any mental stress, either short or long term, can alter the bacterial composition of the gut, favoring “nervous” strains of bugs. That’s why stressful life events—a death in the family, lost job, divorce, or other trauma—often serve as triggers for autoimmune conditions. Countless studies have shown that depression is linked to health conditions such as irritable bowel syndrome, chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, chronic pain, addiction, insulin resistance, and obesity. The hormonal shifts triggered by that acute stress encourage the proliferation of pathogenic bad bacteria and decrease beneficial probiotics, leading to higher rates of leaky gut—allowing those nervous bugs to spread anywhere in the body.6*  

- Page 169 (location ~ 2583-2594)    

*Bacteria help themselves survive by influencing us to choose foods that feature the particular nutrients they grow best on, rather than just taking whatever comes along.8 Some bacteria love fat; others love sugar. The bacteria are able to manipulate our feelings and cravings by changing neural signals along the vagus nerve. In this way, our gut bacteria literally teach us what to eat—they’re able to alter our taste receptors, release toxins that make us feel bad, and reward us with chemicals that make us feel good—all in the service of their own survival and population growth.*  

- Page 170 (location ~ 2596-2601)    

*One place to break the cycle is by reinforcing your good bugs. Research has proven that increasing good bacteria such as Bifidobacterium longum, through eating fermented foods or taking probiotic supplements, can actually reduce anxiety and stress.10 B. infantis 35624 has been shown to raise blood levels of tryptophan, the precursor to serotonin. Lactic acid–producing bacteria in yogurt also produce GABA, which activates the same neuroreceptors that are targeted by antianxiety drugs such as Valium and other benzodiazepines. One fascinating study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found that mice that had eaten the same amount of Lactobacillus rhamnosus as would be present in an average cup of yogurt lowered their cortisol levels by half. Faced with an anxiety-provoking test after ingesting the probiotic, the mice acted more daring and less nervous, behavior equivalent to what the researchers had previously seen when the mice were given antidepressant drugs.*  

- Page 172 (location ~ 2625-2632)    

*Another way to interrupt the feedback loop is by combating stress at the source, by consciously and deliberately soothing our frayed nerves. The vagus nerve—that nerve that facilitates brain-gut chatter—is also a direct line into our parasympathetic nervous system, a.k.a. the “rest and digest” system. The PNS is responsible for helping the body recover from the fight-or-flight response—it lowers cortisol levels, reduces blood pressure, and directs blood back to the digestive tract. We humans are actually meant to spend much more time in PNS mode than we do. That’s the mode that allows for peaceful contentment and joyful connection with our loved ones. We can soothe our entire nervous system—literally teach our body to turn down our chronic stress response—when we choose activities that support the PNS, such as focused exercise, meditation, and prayer. By consciously tuning into that silent space within, we not only decrease our stress in the moment, we fortify our mind and our nervous system for the future. Research has found that toning the PNS can help turn down the inflammatory response in autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis.15*  

- Page 173 (location ~ 2641-2650)    

*This may come as a surprise to you, but the number-one cause of leaky gut is our modern medical system. Prescription medications—the biggest weapon in modern medicine’s arsenal—readily deplete the body of nutrients and damage the gut lining. This is why all synthetic drugs in some way cause leaky gut. People don’t realize how some of the most popular drugs in America rob the body of essential vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and probiotics . . . which leads to common symptoms such as fatigue, depression, and pain . . . which leads to more serious diseases and additional rounds of prescription drugs. Perhaps the most dramatic example of this downward health spiral is our country’s epidemic of addiction to prescription pain medication. Often people reach for these drugs as a relief from chronic pain caused by autoimmune conditions such as fibromyalgia, lupus, or MS. These medications act on the opioid receptors in several places within the body, including the gut, which interferes with peristalsis and blocks the release of digestive enzymes, really complicating digestion.1 People on opioids tend to suffer from GERD and acid reflux, as well as debilitating constipation, which then leads to long-term laxative use.2 What makes all of this even sadder is the fact that these incredibly dangerous drugs just aren’t that effective long term. A Danish study of more than eleven thousand patients found that long-term opioid users were more likely to have lower quality of life, be unemployed, be in poor health, have spent more time and money on health care—and still were more likely to describe themselves as experiencing moderate to severe to very severe pain.3*  

- Page 178 (location ~ 2725-2739)    

*Suzy Cohen, RPh (registered pharmacist) and author of Drug Muggers, believes that more than half of the prescribed drugs approved in the United States commonly deplete specific nutrients in the body. She likened this phenomenon to a “mugging” that many are not aware of, just like having their pockets picked in a crowded subway. According to Cohen, prescription drugs can mug you by:    altering the acidity in your stomach    overburdening your liver    damaging your intestinal lining    inhibiting enzymes involved in turning nutrients into more usable substances*  

- Page 179 (location ~ 2739-2746)    

*The risk with prescription medicines goes way beyond leaky gut, unfortunately. In an editorial published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, Barbara Starfield, MD, of the Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health, reported that 290 people a day—approximately 106,000 a year—die from nonerror, adverse effects of medications. Dr. Starfield noted that figure was for deaths only and did not include adverse effects associated with disability or discomfort.4 Compare this number to the top two leading causes of death in this country. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 611,105 people died from heart disease and 548,881 people succumbed to cancer in 2013. All of this extremely troubling data just begs the question: what’s the number of people who die each year from taking nutritional supplements, herbs, or essential oils? Answer: a resounding zero in 2013, according to the annual report from the American Association of Poison Control Centers.5 That is an incredible statistic when you consider that U.S. citizens alone took over sixty billion vitamin and mineral doses that year.*  

- Page 180 (location ~ 2756-2766)    

*Perhaps the greatest irony of the antibiotic resistance crisis is the treatment that holds the most promise to cure it: the “fecal microbiota transplant,” a.k.a. a poop transplant. It may sound gross, but the procedure is actually very simple and very “clean.” Fecal matter contains the highest concentrated source of gut bacteria—up to half of the mass of our waste is composed of bacteria. For a transplant to occur, a fecal donor is first screened for any diseases or infections, then makes a “donation.” That specimen is introduced into the sick patient, either via a tube during a colonoscopy or by mouth, in a series of thirty enteric-coated capsules. One dose of FMT has been shown to be 92 percent effective against recurrent C. diff within just a few days.10 These were patients at death’s door—yet they sprang out of bed, completely healed, practically overnight. Some scientific trials actually had to be stopped because the fecal transplant was shown to be so effective, the researchers decided it was not ethical to deny the control group that same lifesaving intervention.*  

- Page 184 (location ~ 2807-2816)    

*Respiratory infections. Nearly two hundred students living in dorms at Framingham State University in Massachusetts were given either a placebo or a powder blend containing probiotic strains during the height of the flu season. Researchers found that while all students caught colds or the flu bug at roughly the same rate, the students who took probiotic supplements experienced:15    Colds that were two days shorter (four days versus six days)    Symptoms that were 34 percent less severe    Fewer missed days in the classroom (by half)*  

- Page 186 (location ~ 2841-2848)    

*Weight loss. I’ve seen this happen time and again in my practice. Probiotics help make your intestinal walls less permeable, which means fewer molecules enter your bloodstream and lead to the inflammation that can cause or contribute to obesity and type 2 diabetes. In a study published in the British Journal of Nutrition, researchers from Laval University in Quebec showed that although they ate the same diet, women who took probiotic supplements lost 9.7 pounds on average, while women who took a placebo lost 5.7 pounds.18 The study demonstrated that the intestinal flora of obese individuals differ from those of thinner people, which may be due to the fact that a diet high in fat and low in fiber promotes certain bacteria at the expense of others, according to the study’s summary.*  

- Page 187 (location ~ 2854-2860)    

*Eat Dirt (Dr. Josh Axe)*  

- Page 201 (location ~ 3071)    

*Also, don’t forget to reseed your gut with good dirt in other ways, too:    Spend time walking barefoot outside    Shop at your local farmer’s market for fresh produce    Play with your dog or ride a horse    Consume one tablespoon of raw local honey daily    Dig in the soil of your garden    Swim in the ocean and freshwater lakes    Consume two servings daily of fermented foods    Eat medicinal mushrooms like shiitake and green algae like spirulina All of these opportunities for dirt microexposures help to continuously replenish and nourish the bacteria that are sloughed off each day, keeping them well fed and happy.*  

- Page 202 (location ~ 3083-3094)    

*Be sure to cook with coconut oil, which supports the immune system and can be used at all temperatures. Coconut oil contains lauric acid, known to reduce Candida albicans, fight bad bacteria, and create a hostile environment for viruses. Coconut oil has a way of absorbing fat-soluble vitamins, calcium, and magnesium while easing the strain on the pancreas. Medium-chain fatty acids are known for improving symptoms of gallbladder disease. A study published in Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy found coconut oil’s lauric acid and capric acid to be effective natural treatments for candida and yeast infections.1*  

- Page 205 (location ~ 3139-3144)    

*Foods High in Prebiotic Soluble Fiber apples artichokes asparagus avocados beans blueberries broccoli brussels sprouts cabbage carrots celery chia seeds collards cucumbers figs flaxseeds garlic hemp kale lentils oatmeal onions pears peas pumpkin raspberries sesame spinach strawberries*  

- Page 207 (location ~ 3172-3187)    

*Try a magnesium supplement to help relieve tense muscles and headaches. Take approximately five hundred milligrams a day and consume more magnesium-rich foods like avocado, pumpkin seeds, spinach, figs, and yogurt. Listen to music for at least ten minutes a day. And if you want to drop your stress levels even further, sing! Singing allows your body to release deep-rooted stress, and according to a study published in the journal the Gerontologist, it can even improve memory, focus, and mood.7 Go “forest bathing.” Go on a short walk in the woods, and take many deep breaths, consciously bringing the scent of the trees into your lungs. This form of aromatherapy is a practice called “shinrin-yoku,” or “forest bathing,” in Japanese. Researchers there have found breathing in the antimicrobial organic compounds called phytoncides—the woods’ essential oils—decreased cortisol levels and blood pressure, enhanced immune system function, and stabilized nervous system activity.*  

- Page 210 (location ~ 3218-3226)    

*   Probiotics are the most important part of resealing. A high-quality, live probiotic supplement will speed up the healing of the gut by restoring the balance of the bacteria. (See the very thorough discussion of probiotics in chapter 9.)    Digestive enzymes. These nutrients completely break down proteins, fatty acids, complex sugars, and starches, which can reduce intestinal inflammation. Look for full-spectrum digestive enzyme supplements that contain:    protease, which breaks down proteins, including gluten    amylase, which breaks down starches    lipase, which breaks down fats    lactase, which breaks down lactose in dairy    L-glutamine. Here’s an essential amino acid with anti-inflammatory qualities as well as health benefits that include repairing the gut and intestinal lining. Another benefit of taking L-glutamine regularly is that it helps thicken cell walls and resist Staphylococcus aureus bacterial infections, according to a study published in Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. The highest quality is called l-alaynl-glutamine, which the intestines can use more readily.*  

- Page 212 (location ~ 3236-3249)    

*The more I studied Chinese medicine, the more I learned about how to look at illness as a matter of disharmony and imbalance rather than something to be solved with drugs. Eastern medicine has developed over thousands of years, based on individualized research, with millions of case studies. Something about this highly specific approach felt more genuine and helpful to me—and more reflective of my own approach—than the current iteration of Western medicine.*  

- Page 218 (location ~ 3337-3340)    

*Modern Western medicine tends to compartmentalize bodily systems, viewing the digestion process as separate and distinct from other processes. When we experience digestive issues, most physicians or specialists will try to “fix” the ailment—or the organ—with prescription drugs. But in TCM, every system is viewed as connected to—and influencing—the other. And good digestion is considered to be central to good health. Zhang Jie Bin, known as one of the four great masters from the Ming dynasty, wrote, “The doctor who wants to nourish life has to tonify the stomach and spleen.”1 Chinese medicine holds that the body is composed of five elements (also known as five phases): wood, fire, earth, metal, and water. Every person is a unique and characteristic blend of the influences of all these elements. When I first read about the five elements, I thought, Is this a little too “out there” for me? But as I continued to uncover case studies and study the core principles, I began to identify very clear correlations between the five phases and some of the most common patterns I see in my own practice.*  

- Page 218 (location ~ 3340-3349)  
