---
date: "2020-02-09"
image: rice-fields_sq.jpg
title: China's Great Leap Forward
type: gallery
---

**TL;DR:**   The Chinese population is declining and there are several compounding issues such as limited farmland and an overweight retiring demographic forcing China to be creative to sustain their aggressive growth distributed among fewer working heads.


*China faces a quadruple bind: China’s margin of error starts razor thin, and not only because its lands are below subpar. One downside of China’s massive population is that the country has less farmland per person than Saudi Arabia. As China’s population urbanized under the Order, much of the country’s good(ish) farmland was paved over, pushing Chinese farmers farther inland into ever-more marginal territories, which require more and more inputs to produce the same amount of foodstuffs. Unsurprisingly, the Chinese economic sector that is most dependent upon the expansion-at-all-costs financial strategy is agriculture. When the Chinese financial system cracks, not only will China face a subprime-style crisis in every economic sector simultaneously, but it will also face famine—even if nothing goes wrong externally. On the surface, it appears China has sufficient oil and natural gas production to maintain domestic production of its fertilizer and fuel needs for its agricultural sector. After all, while China is a net importer of both fossil fuels, unlike most of Europe it still retains significant local production capacity. Not so fast. In any sort of constrained import environment—such as problems in the explosion-heavy Middle East—the Chinese will have to choose what they will let go of. Electricity? Motor fuels? Fertilizers? There won’t be enough to go around, and that forces choices. China now isn’t simply the world’s largest importer of rice, barley, dairy, beef, pork, fresh berries, and frozen fish by tonnage. It absorbs more globally traded sorghum, flax, and soy than the rest of the world combined. The ongoing import of those products requires both the American Order and the ability of the wider world to produce the products in the first place. Unfortunately, it isn’t as if the Chinese are alone in this dilemma. Roughly one-fifth of the world’s agricultural produce is internationally traded, while four-fifths is dependent upon externally supplied petroleum-derived inputs, mainly fuel and pesticides. Remove the stability and shipping options and supply chains the Order makes possible, and many, many countries must figure out how to feed their populations with limited outside assistance. Most will fail.*
  

- Excerpt from *Disunited Nations* (Peter Zeihan)