---
title: Delusions of Gender (Cordelia Fine)
author: E
date: '2017-07-11'
summaryOn: true
summary: 'Hola, this is el summary'
categories: []
tags:
  - books
  - review
showDate: no
draft: yes
---


*Evan gradually comes to be able to offer comfort in a more conventional way. The politically correct and/or scientifically uninformed among you may be wondering about the cause of Evan’s peculiar behaviour. Does he secretly find Jane deeply unattractive? Is he in the slow process of recovery from some deeply traumatic incident? Was he raised by wolves until the age of thirteen? Not at all. He’s just a regular guy, with a regular guy-brain that’s wired all wrong for empathy. That a simple act of comfort is not part of Evan’s behavioural repertoire is the fault of the neurons dealt him by nature: neurons that endure a devastating ‘testosterone marination’; neurons that are lacking the same ‘innate ability to read faces and tone of voice for emotional nuance’ as women’s; neurons, in a word, that are male.*  

- Page 6 (location ~ 88-94)    

*The blurb of the influential book Why Gender Matters by physician Leonard Sax, founder and executive director of the National Association for Single Sex Public Education (NASSPE), promises to show readers how to ‘recognize and understand … hardwired differences [between the sexes] to help every girl and every boy reach their fullest potential.’5 Likewise, parents and teachers are informed in a recent Gurian Institute book that ‘Researchers [using MRI] have literally seen what we have always known. There are fundamental gender differences and they start in the very structure of the human brain.’6 Thus, Gurian suggests that ‘to walk into a classroom or home without knowledge of both how the brain works and how the male and female brains learn differently is to be many steps behind where we can and should be as teachers, parents, and caregivers of children.’*  

- Page 8 (location ~ 117-124)    

*About 200 years ago, the English clergyman Thomas Gisborne wrote a book that despite its, to my mind, rather unappealing title – An Enquiry into the Duties of the Female Sex – became an eighteenth-century best seller. In it, Gisborne neatly set out the different mental abilities required to fulfil male versus female roles: The science of legislation, of jurisprudence, of political economy; the conduct of government in all its executive functions; the abstruse researches of erudition … the knowledge indispensable in the wide field of commercial enterprise … these, and other studies, pursuits, and occupations, assigned chiefly or entirely to men, demand the efforts of a mind endued with the powers of close and comprehensive reasoning, and of intense and continued application.9 It was only natural, the author argued, that these qualities should be ‘impart[ed] … to the female mind with a more sparing hand’ because women have less need of such talents in the discharge of their duties. Women are not inferior, you understand, simply different. After all, when it comes to performance in the feminine sphere ‘the superiority of the female mind is unrivalled’, enjoying ‘powers adapted to unbend the brow of the learned, to refresh the over-laboured faculties of the wise, and to diffuse, throughout the family circle, the enlivening and endearing smile of cheerfulness’.10 What awfully good luck that these womanly talents should coincide so happily with the duties of the female sex.*  

- Page 9 (location ~ 134-146)    

*Baron-Cohen explains that the female brain’s propensity for understanding others’ thoughts and feelings, and responding to them sympathetically, ideally suits it to occupations that professionalise women’s traditional caring roles: ‘People with the female brain make the most wonderful counsellors, primary-school teachers, nurses, carers, therapists, social workers, mediators, group facilitators or personnel staff.’13 Philosopher Neil Levy’s neat summary of Baron-Cohen’s thesis – that ‘on average, women’s intelligence is best employed in putting people at their ease, while the men get on with understanding the world and building and repairing the things we need in it’14 – can’t help but bring to mind Gisborne’s eighteenth-century wife, busily unbending the brow of her learned husband. Baron-Cohen does, it must be said, take great pains to point out that not all women have a female, empathising brain, nor all men a male, systemising one. However, this concession does not set him apart from traditional views of sex differences quite as much as he might think. As long ago as 1705, the philosopher Mary Astell observed that women who made great achievements in male domains were said by men to have ‘acted above their Sex. By which one must suppose they wou’d have their Readers understand, That they were not Women who did those Great Actions, but that they were Men in Petticoats!’15 Likewise, a few centuries later intellectually talented women were ‘said to possess “masculine minds”.’*  

- Page 10 (location ~ 153-165)    

*In her recent book The Sexual Paradox, journalist and psychologist Susan Pinker tackles the question of why ‘gifted, talented women with the most choices and freedoms don’t seem to be choosing the same paths, in the same numbers, as the men around them. Even with barriers stripped away, they don’t behave like male clones.’ Considering this, to some, unexpected outcome, Pinker wonders ‘whether biology is, well, if not destiny exactly, then a profound and meaningful departure point for a discussion about sex differences.’20 The gender gap, she suggests, has in part ‘neurological or hormonal roots’.21 As the barriers of a sexist society continue to fall, there seem to be fewer and fewer social scapegoats to call on to explain continuing gender inequalities and work segregation. When we can’t pin the blame on outside forces, all eyes swivel to the internal – the differences in the structure or functioning of female and male brains. Wired differently from men, many women choose to reject what Pinker calls the ‘vanilla’ male model of life – in which career takes priority over family – and have different interests.*  

- Page 12 (location ~ 182-191)    

*This confident proclamation, made at a time when women were not granted full membership to, for example, Harvard, Cambridge or Oxford University seems – I don’t know – a bit premature? And, given that at the time women couldn’t vote, was it not also a little rash for Thorndike to claim with such confidence that ‘even should all women vote, they would play a small part in the Senate’?30 In retrospect, the constraints on women are perfectly obvious. Hey, Professor Thorndike, we might think to ourselves, ever think about letting women into the Royal Society, or maybe offering them a little civil entitlement known as the vote, before casting judgement on their limitations in science and politics? Yet to many of those who were there at the time, the slope of the playing field was imperceptible. Thus philosopher John Stuart Mill’s denial in 1869 that ‘any one knows, or can know, the nature of the two sexes, as long as they have only been seen in their present relation to one another’31 was revolutionary, and derided. Decades later it was still with only the utmost tentativeness that the early-twentieth-century researcher of ‘eminence’, Cora Castle, asked, ‘Has innate inferiority been the reason for the small number of eminent women, or has civilisation never yet allowed them an opportunity to develop their innate powers and possibilities?’*  

- Page 15 (location ~ 228-238)    

*Over the intervening centuries, the neurological explanations behind men and women’s different roles, occupations and achievements have been overhauled again and again, as neuroscientific techniques and understanding have become ever more sophisticated. Early brain scientists, using the cutting-edge techniques of the time, busily filled empty skulls with pearl barley, carefully categorised head shape using tape measures and devoted large portions of careers to the weighing of brains.34 Infamously, they proposed that women’s intellectual inferiority stemmed from their smaller and lighter brains, a phenomenon that came to be widely known among the Victorian public as ‘the missing five ounces of the female brain.’35 The hypothesis, widely believed, that this sex difference in the brain was of profound psychological significance was championed by Paul Broca, one of the most eminent scientists of the time. Only when it became inescapably clear that brain weight did not correlate with intelligence did brain*  

- Page 16 (location ~ 243-251)    

*Over the intervening centuries, the neurological explanations behind men and women’s different roles, occupations and achievements have been overhauled again and again, as neuroscientific techniques and understanding have become ever more sophisticated. Early brain scientists, using the cutting-edge techniques of the time, busily filled empty skulls with pearl barley, carefully categorised head shape using tape measures and devoted large portions of careers to the weighing of brains.34 Infamously, they proposed that women’s intellectual inferiority stemmed from their smaller and lighter brains, a phenomenon that came to be widely known among the Victorian public as ‘the missing five ounces of the female brain.’35 The hypothesis, widely believed, that this sex difference in the brain was of profound psychological significance was championed by Paul Broca, one of the most eminent scientists of the time. Only when it became inescapably clear that brain weight did not correlate with intelligence did brain scientists acknowledge that men’s larger brains might merely reflect their larger bodies.*  

- Page 16 (location ~ 243-251)    

*At the core of the first part of this book, ‘“Half-Changed World”, Half-Changed Minds’, is the critical idea that the psyche is ‘not a discrete entity packed in the brain. Rather, it is a structure of psychological processes that are shaped by and thus closely attuned to the culture that surrounds them.’38 We tend not to think about ourselves this way, and it’s easy to underestimate the impact of what is outside the mind on what takes place inside. When we confidently compare the ‘female mind’ and the ‘male mind’, we think of something stable inside the head of the person, the product of a ‘female’ or ‘male’ brain. But such a tidily isolated data processor is not the mind that social and cultural psychologists are getting to know with ever more intimacy. As Harvard University psychologist Mahzarin Banaji puts it, there is no ‘bright line separating self from culture’, and the culture in which we develop and function enjoys a ‘deep reach’ into our minds.39 It’s for this reason that we can’t understand gender differences in female and male minds – the minds that are the source of our thoughts, feelings, abilities, motivations, and behaviour – without understanding how psychologically permeable is the skull that separates the mind from the sociocultural context in which it operates. When the environment makes gender salient, there is a ripple effect on the mind. We start to think of ourselves in terms of our gender, and stereotypes and social expectations become more prominent in the mind. This can change self-perception, alter interests, debilitate or enhance ability, and trigger unintentional discrimination. In other words, the social context influences who you are, how you think and what you do. And these thoughts, attitudes and behaviours of yours, in turn, become part of the social context. It’s intimate. It’s messy. And it demands a different way of thinking about gender.*  

- Page 18 (location ~ 267-281)    

*In one of the most widely used tests, the computer-based Implicit Association Test or IAT (developed by social psychologists Anthony Greenwald, Mahzarin Banaji and Brian Nosek), participants must pair categories of words or pictures.9 For example, first they might have to pair female names with communal words (like connected and supportive), and male names with agentic words (like individualistic and competitive). Participants usually find this easier than the opposite pairing (female names with agentic words, and male names with communal words). The small but significant difference in reaction time this creates is taken as a measure of the stronger automatic and unintended associations between women and communality, and men and agency.*  

- Page 24 (location ~ 354-359)    

*The principle behind learning in associative memory is simple: as its name suggests, what is picked up are associations in the environment. Place a woman behind almost every vacuum cleaner being pushed around a carpet and, by Jove, associative memory will pick up the pattern. This certainly has its benefits – it’s an effortless and efficient way to learn about the world around you – but it also has its drawbacks. Unlike explicitly held knowledge, where you can be reflective and picky about what you believe, associative memory seems to be fairly indiscriminate in what it takes on board. Most likely, it picks up and responds to cultural patterns in society, media and advertising, which may well be reinforcing implicit associations you don’t consciously endorse. What this means is that if you are a liberal, politically correct sort of person, then chances are you won’t very much like your implicit mind’s attitudes. Between it and your conscious, reflective self there will be many points of disagreement. Researchers have shown that our implicit representations of social groups are often remarkably reactionary, even when our consciously reported beliefs are modern and progressive.11 As for gender, the automatic associations of the categories male and female are not a few flimsy strands linked to penis and vagina. Measures of implicit associations reveal that men, more than women, are implicitly associated with science, maths, career, hierarchy and high authority. In contrast, women, more than men, are implicitly associated with the liberal arts, family and domesticity, egalitarianism and low authority.12*  

- Page 24 (location ~ 362-373)    

*They recruited women from two liberal arts colleges in the United States, one a women’s college and the other coed. The researchers measured the women’s implicit and conscious attitudes towards women and leadership during the first few months of freshman year and then again a year later. The type of college experience – coed or single sex – had no effect on the students’ self-reported beliefs about women’s capacity for leadership. However, it did have an effect on their implicit attitudes. At the beginning of freshman year, both groups of women were slow to pair female and leadership words on the IAT. But by sophomore year, the women at the single-sex college had lost this implicit disinclination to associate women with leadership, while coed students had become even slower at pairing such words. This divergence appeared to be due to students in women’s colleges tending to have more exposure to female faculty, and coed students – particularly those who took maths and science classes – having less experience with women in leadership positions. The patterns of their environment, in other words, altered the gender stereotypes represented in the implicit mind.*  

- Page 25 (location ~ 380-388)    

*In a recent series of experiments, Adam Galinsky at Northwestern University and his colleagues showed participants a photograph of someone: a cheerleader, a professor, an elderly man, or an African American man. In each case, some of the volunteers were asked to pretend to actually be the person in the photograph and to write about a typical day as that person. Control participants were told to write about a typical day in the person’s life from a more dispassionate, third-person (he/she …) point of view. (This meant the researchers could see the effects of perspective-taking over and above any effects of priming a stereotype.) The researchers discovered that perspective-taking gave rise to ‘self-other merging’. Asked to rate their own traits after the exercise, those who had imagined themselves as a cheerleader rated themselves as more attractive, gorgeous and sexy, compared with controls. Those who imagined themselves as professors felt smarter, those who walked in the shoes of the elderly felt weaker and more dependent, and those who had temporarily lived life as an African American man rated themselves as more aggressive and athletic. Self-perception absorbed the stereotypical qualities of another social group.27 The researchers then went on to show that these changes in the self-concept had an effect on behaviour. Galinsky and his colleagues found that pretending to be a professor improved analytic skills compared with controls, while a self-merging with cheerleader traits impaired them. Those who had imagined themselves as an African American man behaved more competitively in a game than those who had briefly imagined themselves to be elderly. The simple, brief experience of imagining oneself as another transformed both self-perception and, through this transformation, behaviour. The maxim ‘fake it till you make it’ gains empirical support.*  

- Page 31 (location ~ 466-480)    

*is it really true that women have more privileged access to men’s thoughts than they do themselves, or that ‘a man can’t seem to spot an emotion unless someone cries or threatens bodily harm’?2 – we’re all familiar with the concept of womanly intuition and womanly tenderness. It’s important, by the way, not to jumble together these two distinct ‘feminine’ skills. When a man looks for a soul mate to refresh his overlaboured faculties and unbend his learned brow, if he is wise he will check for two different qualities in his potential candidates. First, he needs someone who is quick to discern – from, for example, its furrowed appearance – that his brow is indeed in need of straightening. This is cognitive empathy, the ability to intuit what another person is thinking or feeling. But in addition, she needs to be the kind of person who will use her powers of interpersonal perception for good, not evil. Affective empathy is what we commonly think of as sympathy – feeling and caring about the other person’s distress. Put the two together and you have an angel in human form. As Baron-Cohen describes it in The Essential Difference, ‘imagine you not only see Jane’s pain, but you also automatically feel concern, wince, and feel a desire to run across and help alleviate her pain.’*  

- Page 33 (location ~ 506-516)    

*The large minority who score approximately equally on the two tests are deemed to have a balanced brain. Baron-Cohen reports that just under 50 percent of women, but only 17 percent of men, have a female brain.5 As journalist Amanda Schaffer pointed out in Slate there is something curious about equating empathising with the female brain when, albeit by a whisker, the majority of women do not claim to have a predominantly empathising focus. She reports that when she asked Baron-Cohen about this, he ‘admitted that he’s thought twice about his male brain/female brain terminology, but he didn’t disavow it.’6 And, while we’re on the subject of terminology, calling a test the ‘Empathy Quotient’ does not, on its own, make it a test of empathising. Asking people to report on their own social sensitivity is a bit like testing mathematical ability with questions like I can easily solve differential equations, or assessing motor skills by asking people to agree or disagree with statements like I can pick up new sports very quickly. There’s something doubtfully subjective about the approach. As it turns out, doubt is well-justified, for both affective and cognitive empathy. In an important review of gender differences in affective empathy, psychologists Nancy Eisenberg and Randy Lennon found that the female empathic advantage becomes vanishingly smaller as it becomes less and less obvious that it is something to do with empathy that is being assessed.7 (So, gender differences were greatest on tests in which it was very clear what was being measured, that is, on self-report scales. Smaller differences were seen when the purpose of the testing was less obvious. And no gender difference was found for studies using unobtrusive physiological or facial/gestural measures as an index of empathy.) In other words, women and men may differ not so much in actual empathy but in ‘how empathetic they would like to appear to others (and, perhaps, to themselves)’, as Eisenberg put it to Schaffer.*  

- Page 35 (location ~ 524-540)    

*The next three studies, all of which took place four or more years after the first empathic accuracy study, did find gender differences. The researchers quickly spotted that there had been a slight change in the form that the viewers used while going through the tape of the interaction. In the new form, for each thought and feeling that they guessed, they had to say how accurate they thought they were. When this version of the form was used womanly intuition existed; when the old form was used, it didn’t.21 Why might this be? Ickes suggested that this small change reminds women that they should be empathic, and therefore increases their motivation on the task. He concludes from his lab’s research that ‘[a]lthough women, on average, do not appear to have more empathic ability than men, there is compelling evidence that women will display greater accuracy than men when their empathic motivation is engaged by situational cues that remind them that they, as women, are expected to excel at empathy-related tasks.’*  

- Page 40 (location ~ 606-614)    

*When the feminine nature of the empathic accuracy test was highlighted by asking participants for sympathy ratings before the empathic accuracy test, women scored significantly better than men. But a second group of women and men went through exactly the same procedure but with one vital difference: they were offered money for doing well. Specifically, they earned $2 for every correct answer. This financial incentive levelled the performance of women and men, showing that when it literally ‘pays to understand’ male insensitivity is curiously easily overcome. You can also improve men’s performance by inviting them to see a greater social value in empathising ability. Cardiff University psychologists presented undergraduate men with a passage titled ‘What Women Want’.24 The text, complete with bogus references, then went on to explain that contrary to popular opinion ‘non-traditional men who are more in touch with their feminine side’ are regarded as more sexually desirable and interesting by women, not to mention more likely to leave bars and clubs in the company of one. Men who read this passage performed better on the empathic accuracy task than did control men (to whom the test was presented in a nothing-to-do-with-gender fashion) or men who had been told that the experiment was investigating their alleged intuitive inferiority.*  

- Page 41 (location ~ 618-628)    

*The take-home message of these studies is that we can’t separate people’s empathising ability and motivation from the social situation. The salience of cultural expectations about gender and empathising interacts with a mind that knows to which gender it belongs. So what would happen if we could temporarily trick a female mind into thinking it was male? As we saw in the previous chapter, when people take the first-person, ‘I’ perspective of someone else, the stereotypical traits of the other permeate and seep into the perspective-takers’ own self-concept. This merging of identities can cross gender boundaries. A few years ago, psychologists David Marx and Diederik Stapel asked a group of Dutch undergraduates to write about a day in the life of a student named Paul. Half of the students wrote in the first-person (‘I’) while the other half used the third-person perspective (‘he’). Afterwards, they were asked to rate themselves on technical-analytic skills and emotional sensitivity skills. For the female undergraduates, thinking of themselves as Paul in the ‘I’ perspective altered their self-conceptions. Women who attempted to be Paul living his life actually incorporated his stereotypical male characteristics into their own self-conceptions. They rated themselves as higher on analytic abilities and lower on emotional sensitivity, compared with women who had written a third-person story. In other words, there was ‘a merging between the self and [Paul], such that female participants became more “malelike” as a result.’ 26 Indeed, they became so malelike that their self-ratings on these stereotypical traits were statistically indistinguishable from the men’s. For men, there was no such effect of being Paul on their self-concept, presumably because they already were a male student.*  

- Page 42 (location ~ 640-653)    

*In the 1980s, Carol Gilligan famously suggested that women and men reason about moral situations in a different way. She suggested that the ‘ethic of justice’ – which privileges abstract principles of justice such as equality, reciprocity and universal rules – is used more by men. In contrast, the ‘ethic of care’ – which takes greater account of the feelings and relationships of those concerned – is used mostly by women. Researchers since have argued that what kind of ethic is used depends a great deal on who the moral dilemma involves: men and women alike are happy to apply abstract universal laws and principles to strangers, but tend to turn to the ethic of care for answers when considering the plight of friends or other intimates.29 And any remaining gender difference in moral reasoning appears not to be hardwired, because it can be eliminated with a change of social identity. Ryan and colleagues presented students from the Australian National University (ANU) with a moral dilemma: A student from the local TAFE (a nonuniversity institute of tertiary education) urgently needs a book for an assignment due the next day. Without the book, the student will fail. The book is not available at the desperate student’s own library. The ANU students are asked whether they would borrow the book from their own library, on behalf of the TAFE student.*  

- Page 44 (location ~ 667-677)    

*In other words, when we are not thinking of ourselves as ‘male’ or ‘female’, our judgements are the same, and women and men alike are sensitive to the influence of social distance that, rightly or wrongly, pushes moral judgements in one direction or another along the care-justice continuum. But moral reasoning is also sensitive to another social factor – the salience of gender. Thus, the authors argue that ‘it is the salience of gender and gender-related norms, rather than gender per se, that lead to differences between women and men.’ Of course, as they also point out, ‘the social reality is that gender, for most, is a ubiquitous category and is arguably the most salient’.*  

- Page 45 (location ~ 687-692)    

*In the eighteenth century Thomas Gisborne observed with pleasure how nature had conveniently endowed the female mind with those very qualities she most needed to discharge her social duties. Nowadays, the argument plays the other way: women choose the social roles that best fit their female mind. But perhaps Gisborne was nearly right, after all. The mind, triggered by social cues, uses its female identity to endow itself with the greater sensitivity, sympathy, and compassion ascribed to it by cultural belief. Then, just as remarkably, these enhancements are gone. It’s as good as magic. But as we’ll see in the next chapter, social psychology is full of these now-you-see-it, now-you-don’t tricks.*  

- Page 46 (location ~ 694-699)    

*In the classic and most widely used test of this ability, the test taker is shown an unfamiliar three-dimensional shape made up of little cubes – the target – and four other similar shapes. Two of these are the same as the original but have been rotated in three-dimensional space, and two are mirror images. The task is to work out which two are the same as the target. Mental rotation performance is the largest and most reliable gender difference in cognition. In a typical sample, about 75 percent of people who score above average are male.1 Gender differences in mental rotation ability have even recently been seen in babies three to four and five months of age.2 While it’s easy to see that a high score on the mental rotation test would be a distinct advantage when it comes to playing Tetris, some also claim (although they’re often strongly disputed) that male superiority in this domain plays a significant role in explaining males’ better representation in science, engineering and maths.*  

- Page 46 (location ~ 703-711)    

*By now, you already know what these methods involve: manipulating the social context in such a way that it changes the mind that is performing the task. For example, you can feminise the task. When, in one study, participants were told that performance on mental rotation is probably linked with success on such tasks as ‘in-flight and carrier-based aviation engineering … nuclear propulsion engineering, undersea approach and evasion, [and] navigation’, the men came out well ahead. Yet when the same test was described as predicting facility for ‘clothing and dress design, interior decoration and interior design … decorative creative needlepoint, creative sewing and knitting, crocheting [and] flower arrangement’, this emasculating list of activities had a draining effect on male performance.*  

- Page 47 (location ~ 714-719)    

*Another outrageous, but successful, approach was recently devised by Italian researcher Angelica Moè.8 She described the mental rotation test to her Italian high school student participants as a test of spatial abilities and told one group that ‘men perform better than women in this test, probably for genetic reasons.’ The control group was given no information about gender. But a third group was presented with a downright lie. That group was told that ‘women perform better than men in this test, probably for genetic reasons.’ So what effect did this have? In both the men-are-better and the control group, men outperformed women with the usual size of gender difference. But women in the women-are-better group, the recipients of the little white lie, performed just as well as the men. How can such easy manoeuvres – changing the way a task is described, bringing a particular social identity to the fore, or telling a simple fib – have such an erosive effect on the most robust gender difference in cognition in the literature? We saw in the previous chapter that the social demands of a situation can change how motivated men and women are to perform well. And psychologists are beginning to uncover other ways in which the social context can change, for better or for worse, the mind’s power and effectiveness.*  

- Page 48 (location ~ 727-737)    

*Psychologists have been very creative in working out how stereotype threat can have such a dampening effect on performance. Occasionally, psychologists make up their own negative stereotypes. But mostly, they are content to exploit preexisting cultural beliefs about group differences, like women’s inferior mathematical ability. This can be done in disquietingly naturalistic ways. Stereotype threat effects have been seen in women who: record their sex at the beginning of a quantitative test (which is standard practice for many tests); are in the minority as they take the test; have just watched women acting in air-headed ways in commercials, or have instructors or peers who hold – consciously or otherwise – sexist attitudes.16 Indeed, subtle triggers for stereotype threat seem to be more harmful than blatant cues,17 which suggests the intriguing possibility that stereotype threat may be more of an issue for women now than it was decades ago, when people were more loose-lipped when it came to denigrating female ability.*  

- Page 51 (location ~ 776-784)    

*As you will begin to appreciate, a mind that is struggling with negative stereotypes and anxious thoughts is not in a psychologically optimal state for doing taxing intellectual tasks. And it’s important to bear in mind that these jittery, self-defeating mechanisms are not characteristic of the female mind – they’re characteristic of the mind under threat. Similar effects have been seen in other social groups put under stereotype threat (including white men).24 And when researchers make the test-taking situation less threatening to women – that is, attempt to create for them the kind of situation in which men usually take maths tests – they don’t see these negative effects on working memory and performance.25 In addition to clogging up working memory, stereotype threat can also handicap the mind with a failure-prevention mindset. The mind turns from a focus on seeking success (being bold and creative) to a focus on avoiding failure, which involves being cautious, careful, and conservative (referred to as promotion focus and prevention focus, respectively). For example, when men and women took a task described either as measuring the ‘verbal skills of men and women’ or simply measuring ‘verbal abilities’ the men changed their approach to the task depending on how the task was framed, that is, whether they were working under the threat of reinforcing the stereotype of male verbal inferiority.26 Under stereotype threat, they tried harder to avoid doing badly (as opposed to trying to do well); they were slower and made fewer errors. The same researchers also showed the benefits for thinking of being positively, rather than negatively, stereotyped on a task. In the brick task, the participants have to think up as many creative uses for a brick as they can. Answers are rated for creativity, from original answers such as ‘to show that I am just another brick in the wall’ to distinctly less creative ones like ‘to build a house’. Students told that people from their discipline tend to do very well on this task got significantly higher creativity ratings than students given the opposite stereotype about their discipline. It’s not hard to see what a boost it could be in the real world, for prevailing cultural beliefs to push you towards a more open, imaginative, thinking style. In Outliers, Malcolm Gladwell compares two very high-IQ students’ responses on the brick test. One student offered several creative examples (such as ‘To use in smash-and-grab raids’). The other student, despite having an extraordinarily high IQ, came up with only two mundane ideas: ‘Building things, throwing.’ Gladwell rhetorically asks, ‘Now which of these two students do you think is better suited to do the kind of brilliant, imaginative work that wins Nobel Prizes?’*  

- Page 54 (location ~ 814-835)    

*In the United States, by 2001 women were earning about half of bachelor’s degrees in mathematics, but only 29 percent of PhDs, and their numbers continue to diminish the further up the ladder you get.30 This can compound her problem in more than one way. Her sex will become more and more salient, which in itself can trigger stereotype threat processes. One study even found that the more men there are taking a maths test in the same room as a solo woman, the lower women’s performance becomes.31 And, surrounded by men, she herself may come to grudgingly believe that women are indeed naturally inferior in maths – and women who endorse gender stereotypes about maths seem to be especially vulnerable to stereotype threat.*  

- Page 55 (location ~ 841-847)    

*Amy Kiefer and Denise Sekaquaptewa at the University of Michigan used the Implicit Association Test described earlier to see how strongly female college students implicitly associated maths with males. Overall, the women were quicker to pair words like calculate, compute, and maths with male words (like he, him, and male) than with female words. Interestingly though, the harder the maths class a woman had most recently taken, the stronger her maths-equals-male tendency. The researchers suggest that this is because harder classes are more male dominated, and so the link between maths and male gets reinforced in the mind. Unfortunately, women with especially strong maths-equals-male implicit associations seem to be at risk of being in a state of perpetual stereotype threat. Students with lower levels of implicit maths-equals-male associations showed the usual boost in performance when a hard maths test was presented in a nonthreatening way. But for women with very strong maths-equals-male associations, the dispersal of stereotype threat in the situation didn’t help. The researchers suggest that this is because the stereotype is so firmly entrenched in the mind that it is resistant to alleviation.*  

- Page 56 (location ~ 850-858)    

*In any case, the interaction between testosterone level and status, and its effect on cognitive performance, seems to apply to women and men alike. But gender stereotypes add an extra layer of complexity to the situation. As Josephs and his colleagues point out, ‘through its hierarchical ordering of two or more groups, a stereotype is essentially a statement about dominance or status.’ 40 When the stereotype of women’s inferiority in maths is made salient, a woman doing a maths test is at risk of confirming her lower status in the hierarchy of numeracy. Josephs and his colleagues predicted that because women with high testosterone are more concerned with their status, they will be particularly vulnerable to stereotype threat. In line with this, Josephs and his colleagues found that stereotype threat only impaired the performance of high-, but not low-, testosterone women. What does this imply for the world beyond the laboratory? It suggests that a talented, high-testosterone man is perfectly placed to rise to the challenge of opportunities that can enhance his status. Yet the situation is completely different for the equally talented high-T woman. Negative stereotypes about her group’s ability create a cognition-impairing mismatch between her desire for high status and the low status that the stereotype ascribes to her. She’s dancing backwards in high heels.*  

- Page 58 (location ~ 885-895)    

*A striking demonstration of this was provided by Mary Murphy and her colleagues at Stanford University. Advanced maths, science and engineering (MSE) majors were asked to give their opinion on an advertising video ‘for an MSE summer leadership conference that Stanford was considering hosting the next summer’.8 Under the cover story that the researchers were also interested in physiological reactions to the video, heart rate and skin conductance were recorded, to give a measure of arousal. After watching the ad, the students were asked questions to assess how much they felt they would belong at such a conference, and how interested they were in attending. There were two, near-identical videos, depicting about 150 people. However, in one video the ratio of men to women approximated the actual gender ratio of MSE degrees: there were three men to every woman. In the second video, men and women were featured in equal numbers. Women who saw the gender-equal video responded very much like men, both physiologically and in their sense of belonging and interest in the conference. But for women who saw the more realistically imbalanced version, it was a very different experience. They became more aroused – an indicator of physiological vigilance. They expressed less interest in attending the conference when it was gender unbalanced. (Interestingly, so did men – although this was probably, one can’t help but think, for different reasons.) And although women and men who saw the gender-balanced video very strongly agreed that they belonged there, the conviction of this agreement among women who saw a gender imbalance was significantly lower. Under the naturalistic condition of male dominance, they were no longer so sure that they belonged.*  

- Page 63 (location ~ 952-965)    

*However, an interest in Star Trek and an antisocial lifestyle may not, in fact, be unassailable correlates of talent in computer programming. Indeed, in its early days, computer programming was a job done principally by women and was regarded as an activity to which feminine talents were particularly well suited. ‘Programming requires lots of patience, persistence and a capacity for detail and those are traits that many girls have’ wrote one author of a career guide to computer programming in 1967.14 Women made many significant contributions to computer science development and, as one expert puts it, ‘[t]oday’s achievements in software are built on the shoulders of the first pioneering women programmers.’ 15 Cheryan suggests that ‘[i]t was not until the 1980s that individual heroes in computer science, such as Bill Gates and Steve Jobs came to the scene, and the term “geek” became associated with being technically minded. Movies such as Revenge of the Nerds and Real Genius, released during these years, crystallized the image of the “computer geek” in the cultural consciousness.’*  

- Page 66 (location ~ 1002-1011)    

*Cheryan and colleagues were also able to increase women’s interest in, for example, joining a hypothetical Web-design company. The researchers note ‘the power of environments to signal to people whether or not they should enter a domain’, and suggest that changing the computer science environment ‘can therefore inspire those who previously had little or no interest … to express a new-found interest in it.’17 You might think that this is a nice sentiment, but that a narrowly focused, unsociable personality simply goes hand-in-hand with talent in computer science. But as developmental psychologist Elizabeth Spelke and Ariel Grace point out, ‘personality traits that are typical of a given profession often are mistakenly thought to be necessary to the practice of the profession.’ They provide, as a historical example, the assumption by an early-twentieth-century psychologist that his talented Jewish students could not succeed in academia because they did not share the traits of the predominantly Christian faculty: he ‘mistakenly assumed that the typical mannerisms of his Harvard colleagues were necessary for success in science.’*  

- Page 67 (location ~ 1021-1030)    

*Philosopher Sally Haslanger has suggested that a difficulty even today for women (and minority) philosophers is that ‘it is very hard to find a place in philosophy that isn’t actively hostile towards women and minorities, or at least assumes that a successful philosopher should look and act like a (traditional, white) man.’22 But choosing a career is not just about finding a place socially in which one can feel at home. It also entails finding a fit with one’s talents. People of course tend to be drawn towards jobs in which they are likely to succeed. If gender stereotypes can affect people’s perceptions of their abilities (as we now know that they can), then it would not be surprising to discover that this then has effects on career decisions.*  

- Page 69 (location ~ 1055-1061)  
